IT was melancholy to admit that Italy also had ceased to interest him, thought
      Hamlin, as he smoked his cigarette on the hillside above the Villa Arnolfini; melancholy,
      although, in truth, he had suspected as much throughout the journey, and, indeed, before
      starting. Pale, milky morning sky, deepening into luminous blue opposite the fast‐rising sun;
      misty blue‐green valley bounded by unsubstantial Apennine peaks and Carrara crags; yellow
      shimmer of vines and of maize, green sparkle of pine and fir branches, glitter of vermilion
      sand crumbling under his feet among the sear grass
       and the brown cistus tufts,—all these things seemed to have
      lost for him their emotional colour, their imaginative luminousness. He tried to realise the
      time when all these things had given him a thrill, had gone to his head, nay, when the mere
      sense of being in Italy had done so; but now the very words “thrill” and “intoxication” seemed
      false, disgusting, and vulgar. Formerly, at least, such things had soaked into him, dyed his
      mind with colour, saturated it with light; instead of remaining, as now, so separate from him,
      so terribly external, that to perceive them required almost an effort. He and the world had
      been becoming paler in the last three years; it was melancholy, but that seemed quite natural
      and in keeping; and besides, a washed‐out world, a man with worn‐out feelings, have quite as
      much psychologic interest for a poet as the reverse.
Walter Hamlin had never been your splash‐of‐scarlet and dash‐of‐orange‐and‐skyblue,
      lust‐and‐terror kind of lyrist; but he had begun his poetical career with a quiet concentra‐
       tion of colour, physical and moral, which had made his
      earliest verses affect one like so many old church windows, deep flecks of jewel lustre set in
      quaint stiff little frames, with a great deal of lead between, and supreme indifference to
      anatomy and perspective. And as a painter (perhaps just because, despite his own contrary
      opinion)—he certainly had less original genius as painter than as poet—he had continued in
      this habit of gemlike harmonies of colour; but in his poetry, and in his reality as a man, it
      struck him that he had little by little got paler and paler, colours turning gradually to
      tints, and tints to shadows; pleasure, pain, hope, despair, all reduced gradually to a
      delicate penumbra, a diaphanous intellectual pallor, of which this utter listlessness, this
      indifference even to having grown indifferent, was, as it were, the faint key‐note. The world
      was a pale and prismatic mist, full of vague, formless ghosts, in which it was possible to see
      only as far as to‐day; and, indeed, why wish to see that paler to‐day called
       to‐morrow? Perhaps there was a little depression added to
      Hamlin’s usual listlessness. It had given him a kind of little shock to see Melton Perry
      again, after those twelve or thirteen years; bringing back to him the time when he had been
      the most brilliant and eccentric of that little knot of æsthetic undergraduates, at whose
      strange doings as Greek gods, and Provençal poets, and Norse heroes, Oxford had murmured in
      those philistine days, and which had welcomed young Hamlin, with his girlish beauty and
      pre‐Raphaelite verses, as a sort of mixture of Apollo and Eros, sitting at the head of the
      supper‐table dressed in green silk, with rose garlands on his head, while Perry led a chorus
      of praise, dressed in indigo velveteen, with peacocks’ feathers in his button‐hole, and
      silver‐gilt grasshoppers in his hair. Poor old Perry! Absurd days those were, thought Hamlin,
      as he walked slowly towards the house, through the grass and hemlock bending with dew, pushing
      aside the fig branches and vine trails along the narrow path between the
       terraced olives; absurd days those, and at which he could
      now, having grown grave and listless, only faintly smile. Still the sight of Perry had brought
      back to him that recurring sense that all those absurd lads of long‐gone days, turned humdrum
      dons, and parsons, and squires for the most part, had had a something, a spontaneity, an
      aristocratic fibre, a sort of free‐bornness, which he missed among the clique‐and‐shop shoddy
      æstheticism with which he now associated, and which sang his praises as those boys had sung
      them so many years before. Professional poetry! professional art! faugh! thought Hamlin; it
      was that feeling which had been making London odious to him of late, and sent him abroad, he
      knew not whither. He was a poet himself, and a painter also, to be sure; but somehow he liked
      to feel (and yet it oppressed him) that he was not of the same stock as his
      fellow‐workers—that he had his coats made by less romantic tailors, and cut his hair and beard
      in less pictorial style. The sense of his difference from all those pen‐
       and‐pencil‐driving men of genius, those reviewer‐poets and
      clerk‐poets, those once‐a‐week‐studio‐receiving painters; the sense of the dust and smoke, as
      it were, of the æsthetic factory, had been choking him of late: he would rather go and
      associate only with well‐dressed numskulls, go and flirt with empty‐headed Faubourg St Germain
      ladies, or emptier‐headed Monte Carlo ladies—he would not touch pen or brush for years. It had
      been silly to accept Perry’s invitation to spend September at the Villa Arnolfini; he had
      accepted, thinking of Perry as he had been, a wild, roistering, half‐French creature, brought
      up at Louis‐le‐Grand, and telling wicked French stories. Good heavens! what a change! When the
      wretched, thin, wasted, depressed‐looking creature, fit for a medieval picture of mansuetude,
      had greeted him by night at the nearest station, and had driven him in the gig, he had been
      quite unable to realise that this was indeed Melton Perry. But he had understood all, all,
      when, in the bleak drawing‐room, in the glare of an ill‐
       trimmed lamp, that lank, limp, lantern‐jawed leering creature
      with a Sapphic profile had come forward and seized him by both hands, and kissed them,
      crying—
“Dear Mr Hamlin, I must kiss the hands that have opened the paradise of body and soul to so
      many of us.”
She, and her speech, and the damp dab on his hands, had passed before him like a nightmare;
      he felt that he would never be able to disassociate Mrs Melton Perry from that horrible smell
      of ill‐trimmed, flickering oil‐lamp. It seemed to him dreadful—a sort of hideous, harpy‐like
      proceeding—that his old friend should have thus been metamorphosed.
“You see,” Perry had said, “I must paint things—well—not the sort of things I exactly
      admire,—because, you see, there’s Mrs Perry and the children—five girls,—and last year’s
      baby.”
Perry’s depressed voice had remained in Hamlin’s ears. This was the end of a bright,
      original fellow—married for love, too! And
       six children! Hamlin had already made up his mind that he
      could not possibly hold out long at the Villa Arnolfini. That Mrs Perry, with her leering
      Sapphic profile, her almost amorous admiration, the limp gown, the five girls, and last year’s
      baby, the all‐pervading smell of oil‐lamp, were too much for him. In three days, he
      calculated, he might decently, on some pretext, slip off to Florence. And then—why, from
      Florence he might go to America. He thought all those big hotels, with the fifteen hundred
      inmates and thirteen brass bands, all that tremendous strain, telegraph‐telephone vulgarity,
      might be refreshing.
Hamlin had got to the bottom of the hill, and in front of him, nestled among the olives and
      the vines, rose the Villa Arnolfini, a time‐ and weather‐stained Tuscan country‐house, with
      its rose‐hedges gone wild among the beans and artichokes, its grotesque ivy‐draped terra‐cotta
      statues, its belvedere towers, from whose crannied sides and yellow lichened tiles
       the pigeons swept down on to the lawn of overgrown grass,
      thick with dew in the blue morning shadow. It had a sort of half‐romantic, half‐idyllic charm,
      which Hamlin could not help recognising: it certainly was better than an American hotel, with
      ten lifts, thirteen brass bands, and fifteen hundred inmates. But, like everything else, it
      was a snare; for behind those sleepy‐looking green shutters were the pink and blue
      chromo‐lithograph pot‐boilers of Melton Perry, were the five girls and the last year’s baby,
      nay, were the Sapphic leer and limp dresses of Mrs Melton Perry herself.
Making these reflections, Hamlin pushed open the green and blistered house‐door and entered
      the wide hall, with rickety eighteenth‐century chairs and tables marshalled round the walls.
      There was one good thing about his hosts, he thought, and that was, that they had no common
      breakfast, but invited their guests to do whatsoever they pleased in the early morning. The
      hall was very silent, and Ham‐
       lin wondered how he should get any breakfast. It struck him
      that he had better go and ring the bell in his bedroom. But on going upstairs he found there
      was no sign of a bell either in it or in the vast scantily furnished drawing‐room, where a
      thick layer of dust reposed on tables and mirrors, and the smell of last night’s oil‐lamp
      still lingered. He saw the open door of Perry’s studio; it was empty, and so was the adjoining
      dressing‐room, where boots and canvases littered the floor. But on the mirror was a paper, on
      which was written in the largest characters: “I am gone to sketch at the Lake of
      Massaciuccoli; shan’t be back till lunch; please look after Hamlin.”
“Confound it!” thought Hamlin, “am I to be left in tête‐à‐tête with Mrs Perry all the morning?” But since Melton Perry thought
      nothing of leaving his guest alone all the morning, he too—the guest—might surely be permitted
      to slip away after breakfast from the effusive æstheticism of his hostess. Having
       found no sign of life on the first floor, Hamlin went
      down‐stairs once more, and proceeded to ramble about in search of breakfast, or, at least, of
      some servant. The ground‐floor seemed to consist entirely of servants’ rooms, offices, and
      strange garners, where sacks of potatoes, garden‐tools, silkworm‐mats, and various kinds of
      pods were gathered together. They were all empty; and empty likewise was the kitchen, its
      brass saucepans and huge spits left invitingly for any one who might care to step through the
      open garden‐door. But next to the kitchen was a sort of nursery, at least so he judged from
      the children’s chairs and battered dolls lying about—and here a table was spread with cups and
      saucers and jugs, and a cut loaf and a plate of figs. “This looks more like it,” thought
      Hamlin, wondering what had become of the inmates of this mysterious abode of sleep. Suddenly
      he heard children talking in a room at the end of the passage, and a sort of subdued, deep,
      melancholy chant, like some church song. He went
       to the door whence came the sounds, and knocked gently. The
      childish chattering did not stop, nor the fitful gusts of chant—deep, nasal, but harmonious
      and weird, with curious, sudden, metallic falsetto notes, less like the voice of a woman than
      of a youth. Hamlin knocked again, and receiving no notice, boldly opened the door and stood on
      the threshold. He was struck by the sight which met him. The room was low and vaulted, with
      walls entirely frescoed with dark‐blue skies sprinkled with birds, mountains like cheeses,
      rivers, box‐like houses, people fishing, and plentiful ducks and parrots on perches; a faint
      green shimmer of leaves came through the open windows; three or four little yellow‐headed
      children were scrambling on the floor, struggling violently over the funeral of a doll in a
      biscuit‐tin. In the middle of the room was a large deal table, covered with singed flannel, on
      the corner of which stood a brasier with some flat‐irons, and a heap of crumpled pink
      pinafores; and behind this table, her tall and
       powerful figure, in a close‐fitting white vest and white
      skirt, standing out against the dark‐blue painted wall and the green shimmer from outside, was
      a young woman bending over a frock which she was ironing, her bare brown arms going up and
      down along the board; her massive and yet girlish body bending with the movement, and singing
      that strange chant which Hamlin had heard from outside.
“I beg your pardon,” said Hamlin, in Italian, as he stood in the doorway. The children
      looked round, tittered, and made remarks in shrill whispers; the girl stopped her work, stood
      erect, putting her iron on the brasier, and stared full at Hamlin with large wide‐opened eyes
      of strange dark‐greyish blue, beneath heavy masses of dark lustreless hair, crimped naturally
      like so much delicate black iron wire, on her narrow white brow.
“I beg your pardon,” said Hamlin again; “but can you tell me how I may get some
      breakfast?”
He could not help smiling in proffering this innocent request, so serious and almost tragic
      was the face of the girl.
“It’s Mr Hamlin,” tittered the children, rolling under the table, and hanging to the
      table‐cloth.
The young woman eyed Hamlin for a second in no very gracious manner; then answered, with a
      certain contemptuous listlessness in her slightly hollowed pale cheeks and beautifully curled
      but somewhat prominent lips—
“I don’t know anything about your breakfast, sir.” She spoke, to his surprise, in perfect
      English, with only the faintest guttural Italian accent. “Mr Perry went to sketch at
      Massaciuccoli early this morning, and took the boy with him; Mrs Perry may never be disturbed
      till nine; and the cook is gone to Lucca for provisions.”
“That’s very sad,” remarked Hamlin, laughing, and looking at this curious and picturesque
      being.
The girl seemed annoyed at being discovered
       in that guise, for she pulled down her white sleeves
      quickly.
“I suppose the cook has orders about your breakfast,” she said, in a tone which seemed to
      put an end to the conversation; and she took up her iron once more. “Mrs Perry did not think
      you would want anything so early; the cook will be back about nine.”
But Hamlin would not be shaken off; the fact was, he enjoyed watching this beautiful sullen
      creature much as he might have enjoyed watching a cat whom he had disturbed in its sleep.
“Nine o’clock!” he said; “that’s a long time to wait. Couldn’t you give me something to eat?
      I saw a table spread in the next room.”
The girl put down her iron with a sort of subdued irritation of manner.
“It’s the children’s breakfast, sir,” she answered; “we have neither tea nor coffee.”
“We have milk,” said the eldest of the little girls pertly, “and figs.”
“Milk and figs!” exclaimed Hamlin; “why, that’s a breakfast for the gods! and won’t you,” he
      went on rather appealingly—“won’t you share a little of it with me?”
“You are Mrs Perry’s guest,” said the girl more sullenly than ever, “and of course you are
      welcome to anything you choose.”
Hamlin felt rather taken aback.
“Indeed!” he said. “I don’t wish to do anything against the habits of the house, or
      disagreeable to you.”
“It is not against any rules,” she answered. “If you will excuse me, I will see whether the
      milk is heated. The children will show you the way.”
HAMLIN felt rather contrite and humiliated as he sat down at the square table, with
      the two eldest children, pert little rosy and flaxen things, on either side of him, and the
      three little ones staring at him, and then suddenly making convulsive dives under the
      table‐cloth and behind each other’s shoulders opposite. He was the furthest possible removed
      from the kind of young man who persecutes pretty housemaids. Whatever vagaries he might have
      had in his life, they were not of that sort; and now, although he had merely intended to ask
      for some breakfast, he found himself somehow in the position of pushing his presence upon a
      servant girl. He was vexed with himself, and became very grave, scarcely
       answering the chatter of the children by his side.
“And you know,” said the eldest child, a pretty little minx of eleven, fully conscious of
      her charms, “mamma told us you were the great poet, and she read us a poem of yours about Sir
      Troilus. Mamma always reads poetry to us—and we liked it so much,—and I liked all about where
      he kisses the lady so much, and her purple dress with the golden roses, and then about Love,
      where he comes and takes her by the throat, and chokes her, and makes her feel like a furnace.
      Mamma says it’s just like love. Mr Thaddeus Smith was in love with the gardener’s girl when he
      came here last year, mamma says.”
“Good heavens!” thought Hamlin, “what a mamma and what children!”
“And mamma told us to get some myrtles and put them in your room,” blurted out a smaller
      one.
“Hush, Winnie! You know you shouldn’t tell,” said the eldest.
“And you know,” insisted the younger, in her little, impertinent lisp, “mamma said we should
      put the myrtles, because you made poems about myrtles; and we were to have had on our best
      frocks, and met you in the hall, and—”
“Hush, Winnie!”
“And thrown roses on the floor before you; only then papa got a telegram saying you were
      coming by the late train, and we had to go to bed—”
Miss Winnie’s revelations and her sister’s expostulations were interrupted by the entry of
      the nurse, or governess, or whatever else she might be, carrying a large jug of milk. She had
      slipped on a skirt and loose jacket of striped peasant cotton, which at a distance looked like
      a dull, rich purple. She sat down at the head of the table, and began silently helping the hot
      milk.
“May I cut the bread for you?” asked Hamlin, feeling quite shy from her silence.
“I don’t think you will know how to do
       it,” she answered. “We have only yesterday’s bread at this
      hour, until the cook returns from market.” When the milk was helped and the bread cut, she
      said, rather sharply—
“Now, children, say your prayer.”
The children immediately set up a shrill chorus; the elder, who wished to show off,
      slowly—the little ones, who were hungry, quicker; an absurdly pseudo‐poetical thanksgiving,
      which reminded Hamlin of the sort of poetry presented to rich foreigners by needy Italians on
      creamy, embossed, and illuminated paper. He was struck by the fact that the girl did not join,
      but waited passively through this religio‐poetical ceremony; doubtless, he thought, because
      she was a Catholic.
“That’s mamma’s Tuesday hymn,” said Winnie; “she makes a different one for each day of the
      week.”
Whereupon the children fell vigorously to their breakfast of bread and milk. Heaven knows
      when Hamlin had eaten bread and milk last—probably, he thought, not since he
       had been out of frocks; but it seemed to him pleasant and
      pastoral. He would have enjoyed this improvised breakfast had the children chattered less
      incessantly (Hamlin did not care for children), and had he not continued to feel rather as if
      he had been courting a nursemaid. The young woman had as much as she could do in pouring out
      more milk, giving out more figs, and cutting more slices of bread and butter for the children;
      and her conversation was entirely engrossed in admonitions to them not to spill their milk,
      not to jump on their chairs, not to talk with their mouths full, and so forth. She seemed
      determined, in her sullen indifferent way, to make Hamlin understand that he might intrude his
      person at that breakfast‐table, but that he had no chance of intruding his personality upon
      her notice. But her very indifference afforded Hamlin an opportunity, and, as it were, a
      right, to examine her appearance: one may surely look at a person who obstinately refuses to
      notice one. She was very beautiful, and even more than
       beautiful—strange. She seemed very young, certainly, thought
      Hamlin—not more than nineteen at most; but her face, though of perfectly smooth complexion,
      without furrow or faintest wrinkle, was wholly unyouthful; the look was not of age, for you
      could not imagine her ever growing old, but of a perfect negation of youth. Hamlin tried to
      think what she might have been as a child, looking round on the childish faces about him, but
      in vain. The complexion was of a uniform opaque pallor, more like certain old marble than
      ivory; indeed you might almost imagine, as she sat motionless at the head of the table, that
      this was no living creature, but some sort of strange statue—cheek and chin and forehead of
      Parian marble, scarcely stained a dull red in the lips, and hair of dull wrought‐iron, and
      eyes of some mysterious greyish‐blue, slate‐tinted onyx: a beautiful and sombre idol of the
      heathen. And the features were stranger and more monumental even than the substance in which
      they seemed carved by
       some sharp chisel, delighting in gradual hollowing of cheek
      and eye, in sudden cutting of bold groove and cavity of nostril and lip. The forehead was high
      and narrow, the nose massive, heavy, with a slight droop that reminded Hamlin of the head of
      Antinous; the lips thick, and of curiously bold projection and curl; the faintly hollowed
      cheek subsided gradually into a neck round and erect like a tower, but set into the massive
      chest as some strong supple branch into a tree‐trunk. He wondered as he looked at her; and
      wondered whether this strange type, neither Latin nor Greek, but with something of Jewish and
      something of Ethiopian subdued into a statuesque but most un‐Hellenic beauty, had met him
      before. The nearest approach seemed to be certain mournful and sullen heads of Michaelangelo,
      the type was so monumental, and at the same time so picturesque; and as he looked at the girl,
      it seemed, despite its strangeness, as if, at some dim distant time, he had seen and known it
      well before.
He looked at her with the curiosity of an artist examining a model, or a poet trying to
      solve a riddle; there was, he felt conscious, nothing insolent or offensive in his stare. Yet
      he felt he must break the silence; so, with real indifference, he suddenly asked—
“ How is it that you speak English so marvellously well? No one would ever guess that you
      were not English.”
“I am English,” answered the girl.
English nationality had explained many otherwise unaccountable mixed types to Hamlin; but
      this took him by surprise, and left him utterly incredulous. This girl certainly was no
      Englishwoman—a Jewess, perhaps. No, never; no Jewess was ever so pure and statuesque of
      outline: some Eastern, dashed with Hindoo or Negro; they were much coarser, more common, of
      far more obvious, less subtle beauty.
“You mean English by adoption,” he suggested, “surely not by blood?”
“My mother was an Italian. I think her
       family came from Sicily or Sardinia, or somewhere,where
      there are Spaniards and Moors,” she answered; “but my father was Scotch. He came from
      Aberdeen.”
“Have you ever been in Scotland?” he asked, just by way of saying something to mitigate the
      personalness of his previous questions.
“No,” she answered, and her lips closed as with a spring; then she added, as if to close all
      further conversation, “I was born in Italy; my father was employed at Spezia in the
      docks.”
The eldest Miss Perry raised her pretty little sentimental head pertly.
“Annina’s father was one of those who make the big men‐of‐war at Spezia.”
“Oh, you know, we once went with papa, and saw a man‐of‐war, and all the boilers and big,
      big cannons,” interrupted a smaller one.
“And he was a bad, bad man,” went on the eldest, composedly. “He used to drink quantities of
       acquavite; and one day when he had
       drunk so much acquavite,
      do you know what he did? He tried to throw Annina’s mother out of the window, and then shot
      himself with a revolver.”
Hamlin listened as the cruel words dribbled out, and stared at the childish face. He had
      never taken any interest in children; but he had never thought that a child could be so
      deliberately (as it seemed to him) malignant. The words made his ears burn, and he felt
      indignant, confused, and humiliated, as if he were a party to them. He did not look at the
      girl; but he somehow saw, or felt, the sullen, suppressed bitterness of shame in her tragic
      face.
“And is it true,” interrupted Winnie, “that you are going to do our picture? Mamma said you
      would want to paint us angels or fairies. All the painters paint us, because, mamma says, we
      are the most beautiful children in Florence. They always give us chocolate and marrons glacés to keep us quiet.”
WHEN breakfast was over, and she had made the children fold up their napkins, the
      nurse took what remained of figs, bread, and milk to lock up in the kitchen. Mildred, the
      eldest of the little Perrys, sidled up to Hamlin, as he stood on the doorstep leading into the
      vineyard, lighting a cigarette, and asked whether he would not like to see her garden.
Hamlin looked down upon the innocent‐looking little fiend with a sort of disgust and
      contempt. “Thank you,” he said; “gardens aren’t much in my line.”
The little thing scowled at this rebuff of her fascinations. But a sudden thought struck
      Hamlin. “Yes, by the way,” he said, “I do take an interest in gardens sometimes. Come and show
      me yours.”
Mildred slipped her arm through his—a long‐legged, fair‐haired, pre‐Raphaelite child, in
      much‐darned stockings and patched pinafore—Winnie, the second, a rounder, more comfortable,
      cherubic beauty, seized his hand. He let himself be led along, among the prattle of the little
      one and the assumed shyness of the elder, through the vineyard, where the tall, red‐tipped
      sorghum brooms stood among the trailing pumpkins and the tufts of fennel, to a small grove
      behind the house, in whose shade were four little raked‐up spaces, with drooping marigolds and
      zinnias stuck into the earth, and small box sprigs.
“This is my garden!” cried Winnie, dragging him along, and pointing to the melancholy little
      patch. “I have marigolds, and sunflowers, and red beans and potatoes.”
“And this is mine,” said Mildred, raising her big blue eyes. “I call it the garden of
      Acrasia; because mamma told us once about Sir Guyon—”
“Won’t you give us anything to buy seeds
       with; we want tomato seeds,” clamoured Winnie.
“Hush, Winnie! I wonder you’re not ashamed!” cried Mildred.
“They are very good sort of gardens,” said Hamlin, fishing in his waistcoat for loose
      silver, while the children looked at him with beaming eyes; “here—I hope your tomatoes may
      prosper and prove eatable.”
Then he suddenly turned to Mildred. “Come here,” he ordered, “I want to speak to you ;” and
      he sat down on a stone bench under a plane‐tree, in which the cicala was sawing away with all
      his might.
Mildred stood in front of him, wondering, half hoping for the usual request that she should
      sit for an angel or a fairy.
“Look here,” said Hamlin, quietly; “I want to know how you would feel if your papa had been
      in the habit of drinking too much acquavite, and had shot
      himself after trying to murder your mamma, and some nasty little girl blurted it all out at
      breakfast to a perfect stranger?”
The child flushed with surprise and anger; she looked as if she would have scratched
      Hamlin’s eyes out. But he looked steadily in her face, and he was a stranger, a gentleman, a
      man, and not her papa; circumstances which entirely overawed her. She recovered her composure
      marvellously, and answered after a moment’s reflection, “My papa is a gentleman, and Annina’s
      papa was a common man —a mascalzone,”—with considerable
      triumph at her dignified argument.
“Your papa is a gentleman,” replied Hamlin, sternly; “I have known him long
      before you were born. But remember, if you say cruel things which hurt people’s feelings,
      whether they be gentle people or servants, however much your papa may be a gentleman,
       you won’t be a lady.”
And Hamlin left the little Perrys to muse upon this moral truth. He felt quite excited; and
      when the excitement had subsided, he felt quite astonished at himself. He could scarcely
      realise that he himself had actually been
       meddling in other people’s affairs, had been reading a
      lesson to other people’s children, all about a little girl saying offensive things to her
      nurse. It was so strange that it quite humiliated him: he had first pushed his company on to a
      nursemaid, and then, unasked, fought the nursemaid’s battle. This confounded Perry household!
      Was it going to turn him also into a ridiculous caricature? He went up‐stairs and wrote some
      business letters, and corrected a lot of proof of his new book. Then he thought it would be
      pleasanter to correct the remainder in the garden; so he brought down his writing‐case, and
      established himself on the grass behind the house. The first‐floor balcony and the roof
      projected a deep shade; and on the high grass flickered shadows of plane‐trees and laurels, as
      through their branches there flickered the pale‐blue sky. The swifts flew round the eaves with
      sharp noise, the cicalas sawed in the trees; all was profoundly peaceable. But suddenly, from
      the first‐floor windows came a vague sound of
       childish sobbing, a confused murmur as if of consolation.
      Then a pause, after which a well‐known voice arose shrill in glib Italian.
“Annina, how dare you distress the signorina Mildred? How dare you say cruel things to my
      poor, poor sensitive child?”
“I have said nothing cruel to the signorina Mildred,” answered a deep, quiet voice; “the
      signorina Mildred went to show her garden to Mr Hamlin, and then came back crying. I asked her
      what had happened, but she refused to tell me. I have nothing to do with her tears.”
“How dare you tell such an untruth?” shrieked Mrs Perry. “The signorina Mildred said
      something about your father at breakfast, and you, like a little viper, turned round upon the
      poor little darling. She is nearly in hysterics! You little serpent!”
“It is one of Miss Mildred’s usual lies,” answered the other voice calmly—“una delle solite
      bugíe.”
Hamlin had been admitted too much into
       confidence. He took up his writing things hastily, and
      removed to the furthest end of the garden, out of reach of the dispute.
This was the pretty result of his interference! He had merely got this poor devil of a
      nursemaid into a scrape. It was the fit punishment for his folly in going out of his way to
      meddle with other folk. He was very much annoyed; he had been dragged into a sordid woman’s
      squabble; Mrs Perry’s scolding had seemed addressed to him. At the same time, he did feel
      indignant that the girl should be treated in this fashion: such a splendid, queenly creature
      slanged by a sentimental, æsthetic fishwife, as he defined his hostess to himself.
The return of Melton Perry interrupted his reflections. Perry was quite astonished to find
      him up, and extremely distressed at his having had no regular breakfast.
“You see,” he said, “Mrs Perry is very delicate—in short, scarcely fit for any kind of
      household bother,—so that—”
“Oh,” answered Hamlin, “I had a capital breakfast with your children.”
Then they fell to talking of old times; and little by little there emerged from out of the
      overworked, henpecked Melton Perry of the present, the resemblance of the proud and brilliant
      Melton Perry of the past.
“Of course,” said Perry, as they sat smoking in the sheltered studio—“of course I’m very
      happy, and that sort of thing. My wife—well, she’s a little impetuous, and I don’t always
      agree about her way of bringing up the children—but there’s no saying that she isn’t an
      immensely superior kind of woman. I don’t always agree with her, mind you; but she has the
      true poetic temperament, and”—here he made an evident effort—“she keeps me up to the mark with
      my work. I was always a lazy hound, you know, and all that. In short, I know I’m quite a
      singularly fortunate man. Nevertheless,—well, I tell you my frank opinion about matrimony:
      never do it; the odds
       are too great. My own belief is, that, especially for an
      artist, it’s a fellow’s ruin. Mine, you see, is an exceptional position. But if you take my
      advice, old man, never marry.”
“I don’t think there is the faintest chance,” answered Hamlin. “Women have got to bore me
      long ago: all that in my poems is mere recollections of the past—descriptions of a myself
      which has long come to an end.”
“I’m glad of it,” replied Perry. “It is a foolish thing to get tied to a woman.”
“Foolish indeed!” thought Hamlin, looking from his shabby, depressed old comrade, to the
      blazing sunsets and green moonlights on the easels about them.
DURING luncheon, no mention was made of the nursemaid into whose concerns Hamlin
      had that morning intruded; but at dinner, Hamlin’s sense of the question being a sore one, and
      of being himself mixed up in it, gave way before his curiosity to solve the riddle of the
      strange‐type which had taken him so by surprise.
“That is a very strange‐looking girl you have in your service,” he remarked to his hostess,
      over their grapes and thin wine.
“The cook?” cried Mrs Perry. “Isn’t she a divine creature? I call her Monna Lisa’s younger
      sister.”
“I don’t know your cook by sight,” he answered. “I mean the other young woman they call
      Annina—”
Mrs Perry’s brow darkened.
“The nurse—or governess,—I don’t know exactly how to describe her,—of your little
      girls.”
“My children’s maid,” answered Mrs Perry, with considerable emphasis. “Thank heaven, my
      children have never had and shall never have any other nurse or any other governess than their
      own mother.”
“Well, now, Julia,” remonstrated her husband, “I think, you know, that’s pushing it a little
      too far.”
“My children shall never learn anything from a menial,” insisted Mrs Perry, “neither to walk
      bodily, nor morally, nor intellectually, as long as I am alive.”
“Good heavens!” thought Hamlin, “what a bandy‐legged family they are likely to turn
      out!”
“I suppose you mean Annie,” said Perry. “Yes, she’s a good girl, and a good‐looking
      girl.”
“You are mad, Melton,” cried Mrs Perry, “with your idea of goodness and good looks!”
“I think her extraordinarily good‐looking,” put in Hamlin, enjoying the authority of his own
      verdict.
“I always told you so,” replied Perry.
“When I say good‐looking,” corrected Hamlin, “I don’t mean it at all in the ordinary sense.
      There are dozens of Italian girls five times as pretty as that girl, and I daresay most people
      don’t think her at all attractive.”
“Yes,” burst out Mrs Perry, “vulgar minds and eyes never appreciate the higher beauty. They
      see only the body.”
“This is exactly a question of the body,” went on Hamlin. “That girl is one of the most
      singular types I have ever come across. She is like some of Michaelangelo’s women, but even
      stranger—a superb creature.”
The revelation of her maid’s beauty by so great an authority as Hamlin quite dazzled and
      delighted Mrs Perry.
“All our servants are handsome,” she said; “the cook’s the finest Leonardo da Vinci
      type—when you see her you will want to do her
       picture, Mr Hamlin, as Venus Mystica,” and Mrs Melton Perry
      set her meagre features and wide‐opening mouth into a mystic smile, intimating that she knew a
      great deal about Venus Mystica, and her guest doubtless likewise.
“And the footman” . . . she went on.
“Errand‐boy,” corrected Mr Perry, suddenly, emboldened by his friend’s presence.
“The footman is quite a type of manly beauty—a young Hercules,—such a neck and shoulders and
      arms—and a head like a cameo. I always make it a rule to engage only handsome servants,
      because it spiritualises the minds of our children to be brought up constantly surrounded by
      beautiful human forms.”
“I see,” answered Hamlin drily, entirely neglecting his opportunity of making the usual
      reply to this remark—namely, that the young Perrys were so abundantly provided with beautiful
      human form in the person of their mother that any other was superfluous.
“That girl you noticed has rather a curious history,” said Perry.
“Indeed!” answered Hamlin;“she looks as if she ought to have some sort of tragic past—a kind
      of Brynhilt or Amazon.”
“It’s tragic enough if you like, but it’s unfortunately not at all poetical,” replied
      Perry.
“There is poetry in all suffering, Melton,” corrected his wife gravely.
“Well, this girl is the daughter of a Scotch mechanic, a very clever fellow, I believe, who
      fell in love with the Italian maid of some old friends of ours, and followed her to Italy. He
      got a very good position in the docks at Spezia, but then the other chaps caballed against
      him, and made him lose his place. They had to live from hand to mouth for a long while, doing
      odd jobs for the railway company; he squandered his money also on inventions, so, little by
      little, he and his wife and children got into great distress. Then he took to drinking, poor
      devil! (I’m sure I should have done so long before;) and one day that he had again been done
      out of a place by some Italian scoundrel
      , he tried to throw his wife out of the window, and then shot
      himself. It was a dreadful business.”
“He was a great republican, poor dear,” added Mrs Perry. “I’m a republican too, a
      socialist—quite a dreadful creature, Mr Hamlin.”
“What became of the wife and children ?” asked Hamlin.
“The children had all died by this time, except Annie; and the poor wife was quite broken in
      health. There was a nephew of the husband’s, a Scotch lad, quite a boy, who was awfully plucky
      and worked for them for some time. Then the widow died; and an old friend of ours, old Miss
      Curzon, the famous singer that had been—perhaps you may have heard of her—took Annie into her
      house.”
“Darling Miss Curzon!” exclaimed Mrs Perry. “She was the noblest woman that ever lived. How
      she loved me! I always say that I lost my voice—I had a lovely voice before my marriage—when
      dear darling Miss Curzon died.”
“Miss Curzon was an excellent old woman,” went on Perry: “she took Annie when
      she was eleven, and kept her in her house and educated her till her own death two years ago;”
      and Perry sighed, as he peeled a hard white peach.
“Then I said to my husband, ‘Perry, this child is a legacy to us from our dearest friend,’”
      went on Mrs Perry, solemnly; “‘we are not rich, but Heaven will send us enough for our
      children and this child; and if it don’t, why, we must do without.’”
“So she has been with you ever since?”
“Yes,” answered Perry, sharply; “and I should like her to remain for the children’s sake,
      only that I feel the girl ought to look out for some better place.” And he turned rather
      gloomily to his wife.
Mrs Perry answered his look with one of sweet and ineffable astonishment. She naturally
      viewed all her property, servants, children, husband, &c., as emanations from herself—that
      is to say, from perfection, and consequently as
       more perfect than other folk’s property, servants, children,
      husbands, although occasionally falling short of this ineffable origin; and she accepted, with
      alacrity and pleasure, the belief in the transcendent beauty of the nursemaid whom she had
      shrieked at only a few hours before. She was quite reconciled to her, evidently.
“And what is this girl’s name?” asked Hamlin.
“Anne,” answered Perry—“ Anne Brown.”
THUS it came about that Walter Hamlin, of Wotton Hall, pre‐Raphaelite poet and
      painter, made acquaintance with Anne Brown, nurse, or as Mrs Perry defined it, children’s maid
      at the Villa Arnolfini.
The whole of the two following days, Hamlin neither saw nor particularly remembered the
      strange girl whose champion he had constituted himself against the little Perrys. An old
      chaise, with an older pony, was produced from the neighbouring farmhouse, and Mr and Mrs
      Melton Perry took it by turns to drive their guest along the dusty roads to the old town of
      Lucca, to various villas, and other sights of the neighbourhood. In the evening Perry led his
      friend out for a stroll among the vineyards and
       the olives, and across the low hills covered with bright
      green pines and dark cypresses. At the end of the third day, Hamlin, while smoking after
      dinner with his host, insinuated to Perry that he really thought he must be pushing on to
      Florence. A look of blank terror overspread poor Perry’s face.
“Nonsense!” he cried—“don’t say that; don’t leave me in the lurch yet.”
“You see,” said Hamlin, hypocritically, “I intend going to America; and I really think I
      ought to do a little work before leaving Italy.”
“What sort of work?”
“Why, I suppose—I think—I ought to take this opportunity of working a little at one of my
      pictures for the next Grosvenor.”
“Which picture?” asked Perry, eagerly.
“I really scarcely know. I suppose I ought to be making some studies for Circe and the child
      Comus.”
“Child Comus!” exclaimed Perry. “Why, I’ve the very thing you want here at hand.
       Such a Comus for you! There’s not a model in all Florence
      will suit you so well; it’s the farmer’s son. Such legs, and such a chest!”
“I don’t intend doing him naked,” answered Hamlin, whose strong point was not anatomy.
“Naked or not, he’s what you want. The head, since you don’t care for legs and chest. You
      shall have him to‐morrow; and you can work much better here than in that swelter at
      Florence—”
“In short,” burst out poor Perry, “don’t leave me yet, old fellow. You don’t know what it is
      for me to have you here—I feel quite another man. It seems to me as if I were ten years
      younger. The fact is, don’t you know, a man’s never the same when once married; it’s a weight
      round his neck. Don’t go away yet, dear old Watty, for the sake of auld lang syne.”
Hamlin could not help being touched by the way in which his old friend threw himself on his
      compassion. Poor old Perry! How
       dreadfully dreary and broken‐spirited he must be when all
      alone with that awful wife of his!
“Well, I’m willing enough to stay, if you’ll keep me,” answered Hamlin.
“That’s right!” cried Perry, squeezing his hand. “Keep me from growing into a turnip for a
      little longer, for goodness’ sake.”
So the next morning the farmer’s boy was sent for, and Hamlin began, in a desultory way, to
      make some studies for his picture. The fact was, he was so utterly indifferent as to all his
      own movements, that it was an absolute relief to be pinned down to one place by his old
      friend. Accordingly he unpacked his things, and prepared to stay at the Villa Arnolfini until
      the Perrys should themselves return to Florence in October.
Little by little he got to arrange his day so as to avoid as far as possible the dreaded
       tête‐à‐tête with Mrs Perry; spending the morning lying on
      the sear grass or the fallen fir‐needles under Melton Perry’s sketching umbrella; and
       locking himself up during the afternoon with the pretext of
      his picture. Locking himself up, and sometimes unlocking the door and letting the lank and
      limp lady come and sit in his improvised studio, entertaining him with her views on life,
      poetry, art, love; and invariably representing herself as the devoted slave of a kind of
      fierce and gloomy lover‐husband of the Othello description. During this first week of his stay
      at the Villa Arnolfini, Hamlin did not lose sight of the Perrys’ strange nursemaid. The girl’s
      exotic, and, so to speak, tragic style of beauty, had made a great impression upon him, but a
      sort of impression such as only a temper entirely artistic could receive. He was interested in
      Anne Brown, but not in the whole of Anne Brown. He wished to see more of her, but to see more
      only of her superb physical appearance, and of that sullen, silent, almost haughty manner
      which accompanied it. As to anything there might be, intellectual or moral, behind this
      beautiful and dramatic creature, he did not
       care in the least, and would much rather have seen nothing
      of it. So far, she was striking, admirable, picturesque, consistent; further details might
      merely spoil the effect. Hence it was that, although he made several sketches of her head from
      memory, and although he rhymed the first half of a sonnet upon the strange fate which had, to
      put it in plain prose, given the beauty of an Amazon to a nursemaid, he instinctively
      abstained from seeking in any way to renew the acquaintance which he had made that first
      morning. The picturesque and imaginative figure was just in the right light and at the right
      distance,—a single movement, and all the picturesqueness and strangeness might vanish. Walter
      Hamlin had had but too many instances of the melancholy results of trying to approach and
      become familiar with creatures who had caught his æsthetic and poetic fancy. He often saw her
      hurrying (if she might ever be said to hurry, for there was something wonderfully measured
      about her) to and fro, filling up,
       it would seem, the gaps in Mrs Perry’s rather theoretical
      housekeeping; and sometimes, passing through the ground‐floor passage, he would also see her
      ironing, like that first time, or laboriously presiding over the little Perrys’ lessons; for
      it appeared that Mrs Perry’s intellectual guidance of her children consisted in telling them
      the plots of novels and repeating choice poetry, leaving such mechanical matters as reading
      and writing to what she called a menial. And even more frequently Hamlin would meet her taking
      the children for a walk, or sitting in the vineyard sewing or reading, while they built houses
      of leaves and sticks, and cooked dinners of maize‐grains and unripe figs. Hamlin scarcely ever
      spoke to her; and if the children forced him to remain and examine their houses or their
      dinners, he would watch the girl, but without the slightest desire of entering into
      conversation. He wished to know only as much as he could see of her. But this much which he
      saw inspired him with a kind of respect,—a respect not for Anne
       Brown, nursemaid or nursery‐governess of Mrs Melton Perry,
      but respect for a beautiful and solemn kind of Valkyr or Amazon; for there is no doubt that to
      certain temperaments not given to respect for social distinctions or religious institutions,
      or even the kind of moral characteristics held to be worthy of respect by ordinary folk, there
      is something actually venerable in some kinds of beauty: the man respects the unknown woman as
      a goddess, and respects himself for having discovered her divinity. So that, habitually and
      instinctively, Hamlin displayed towards the young woman a degree of courtesy which astonished
      the little Perrys, who had seen young men flirt with various of their mother’s carefully
      selected beautiful servants, but never treat them, as Miss Mildred expressed it, as if they
      were funerals passing. All of which distant respect Anne Brown received coldly, as if it were
      a matter of course; showing astonishment only on one occasion, when Hamlin answered, being
      requested to lift little Winnie into the branches
       of an olive‐tree—“You must first ask permission of Miss
      Brown.”
The girl looked up from her work, and fixed her great greyish‐blue eyes upon him in wonder.
      No one had ever called her Miss Brown before.
Thus things might have continued, and Hamlin have left the Villa Arnolfini with only a few
      lines of a sonnet on the fly‐leaf of his ‘Vita Nuova’—a few scratched‐out sketches of a face
      with strange, curling full lips, and masses of wiry hair, in his sketchbook—and a daily
      fainter remembrance of Mrs Perry’s nurse; when one day he took it into his head to construct a
      kind of medieval costume for his peasant‐boy model, and accordingly went to Mrs Perry for
      assistance in sewing together the various shreds of old brocade and satin which he had bought
      at Lucca, the various bits of weather‐stained cotton which he had obtained by barter from the
      peasants. Mrs Perry, lying languidly on a sofa in her dusty boudoir, littered over with
       books and reviews, afforded him a variety of valuable pieces
      of information upon harmonies of colours and the magic of folds; but when it came to practical
      tailoring, she smiled with reproachful gentleness, and, clapping her hands, called out for
      Annie. Annie—that is to say, Anne Brown—emerged from an adjacent room, silent and sullen as
      usual; but when she understood that the job was for Hamlin, she seemed suddenly to develop a
      certain interest in it. The pieces of stuff were spread out on the drawing‐room table, and
      Hamlin proceeded to explain what manner of garment he wanted, Mrs Perry joining in from the
      next room with various bewildering instructions. The girl immediately understood; but the
      piece of work was complicated and tiresome. The stuff had several times to be sewn together,
      tried on to the live model, and then taken down‐stairs to be altered.
“Won’t you sit down and do it here, Miss Brown?” Hamlin at length suggested.
The girl hesitated for a moment, and then
       settled herself to sew at the table of the empty
      drawing‐room. Hamlin went into the studio next door, and tried to draw a little; but he felt
      himself attracted to go and watch the girl as she leaned over the table, or sat with her
      beautiful head bending over her sewing. Every now and then she looked up to ask him some
      question: a regal, tragic, out‐of‐our‐world, almost weird face, the contrast of which with her
      prosiac questions about seams and tucks was almost comic.
Hamlin looked at her as he might have looked at a beautiful cathedral front; and he began to
      feel that kind of anticipated regret at the thought of losing sight of something beautiful and
      rare, that almost painful desire to keep at least some durable likeness of it, which, in
      former years, had often tormented him in the midst of the enjoyment of lovely things. He did
      not see his way to introducing Anne Brown into any picture; nay, he perhaps did not even think
      of his work; but he determined that he must have a likeness of
       her to take away with him. Accordingly, that same evening,
      as he was seated with the Perrys in front of the villa, watching the stars gradually lighting
      themselves in the bright metallic blue sky, Hamlin suddenly turned to his hostess, and asked
      her whether she thought it would be possible for him to make a sketch of Anne Brown.
“I may want her for a picture some day,” he added, half hypocritically.
Mrs Perry’s enthusiasm was immediately kindled.
“Oh !” she exclaimed, “paint a picture of her as the Witch of Atlas, with a red cloak and
      red roses all about her, and a background of cactuses and aloes all twisting and writhing, and
      looking as if they gibbered. Do paint her like that, dear Mr Hamlin—and Mildred and Winnie
      will do for attendant spirits. Begin to‐morrow—you shall have her to sit to you all day; and
      she has such lovely arms and shoulders, you must paint her in some kind of dress
      that will show them.”
“I think it’s rather cool of you to promise Annie as a sitter in that way,” put in Melton
      Perry—“especially with so few clothes on, Julia.”
“Why not?” asked Mrs Perry, in astonishment. “If she is beautiful she must be painted. She
      shall begin sitting to‐morrow morning.”
“She shan’t do anything of the kind!” exclaimed Perry, suddenly. “I don’t see at all what
      right we have to dispose of her. We pay her wages as a servant for our children, not as a
      model for our visitors.”
“I never dreamed of Miss Brown being in any way compelled to sit,” remonstrated Hamlin,
      rather indignantly. “I only wanted your assistance in asking whether she would.”
“Of course she will,” insisted Mrs Perry. “Why, I wonder what great hardship there is in
      sitting for one’s likeness? Haven’t I done it hundreds of times? When a woman is beautiful,
      it’s her duty; that’s what I was always told.”
“It may be the duty of a lady, Julia,” answered
       Mr Perry, gloomily, “and it may be yours; but it isn’t the
      duty of a servant girl—the difference lies in that.”
“Well,” retorted Mrs Perry, angrily, “I think you don’t show much appreciation of the honour
      of having one of the greatest of living painters in our house, Perry. I do, and I shall see to
      his having the proper model.”
“Please, I entreat you, dear Mrs Perry,” cried Hamlin,“ do let the matter go—it really is of
      no consequence; and, indeed, it would be in the last degree distasteful to me to have an
      unwilling sitter.”
“You shall have a willing one, Mr Hamlin;” and Mrs Perry walked off with dignity.
Melton Perry suddenly shook off his languor, and started after his wife.
“Julia,” he cried, “do leave it to me—I’ll speak to Annie—only do leave it to
      me.”
“I see no reason for this,” she answered.
“Then I shall speak to Annie at once,” replied Perry.
“There’s been far too much of this turning of servants into models in this house,” he said,
      turning to Hamlin. “Mrs Perry can’t be got to see that it isn’t at all the right sort of
      thing. I don’t mind so much with the others, for I suppose they’re a parcel of sluts; but
      Annie is another matter. I don’t mind it’s being you, you know, old fellow; but I object to
      the principle. Annie! Annie! I want to speak to you a moment,” and Mr Perry went into the
      house.
After a moment he returned.
“I’ve spoken to her, Hamlin,” he said. “I told her that she was just what you wanted for the
      Lady Guenevere or the Lady of the Lake, or some lady or other—all a lie; but you see I didn’t
      wish her to know it was merely because she’s handsome. I told her she was like a portrait of
      one of these persons. Please don’t tell her she’s not. I really expected she’d refuse; and I
      said to her, ‘Annie, mind you don’t let the mistress force you into sitting; don’t do it to
      please anybody.’ I’m
       really quite surprised, for she’s such a very reserved girl
      always; but then she is an obliging creature too, and I think she’ll do more to please me than
      perhaps my wife, because I always let her understand that this isn’t a good place at all, and
      that she ought to try for another. Well, she says she’ll sit; but not till after the ironing
      is done in the morning. I proposed half‐past nine—will that do?”
“Thank you,” answered Hamlin, putting his hand on Perry’s shoulder; “you’re a good old
      creature, Perry.”
HAMLIN did not succeed in doing much that first sitting. He had thought that Anne
      Brown’s head would be an easy one to sketch; but it proved just the reverse. Those salient and
      outlandish features, which he had thought he could catch in half an hour, were turned into
      caricature by the slightest exaggeration, and exaggeration was almost inevitable. He made
      several beginnings, and scratched them all out; and at the end of a couple of hours he felt
      that he positively could not go on; he had become quite fidgety over his work.
“I have bungled everything,” he said at last, rising, “and kept you here for nothing,
       Miss Brown. The fact is, that you are far more difficult to
      draw than I expected.”
He felt very humiliated at having, as it were, to confess himself a bad artist before such a
      model.
“Try again,” suggested Perry. “I daresay Annie will sit for you again—won’t you, Annie?”
“If Mr Hamlin wishes me to sit, certainly,” answered the girl simply.
“She is confoundedly difficult to draw,” said Hamlin, when she had turned her
      back.
“She’s difficult because she’s a kind of mystery,” explained Perry. “I’ve felt it ever since
      we have had her. One thinks there must be something behind that face, and yet it seems to be a
      mere blank. My belief is, that people of this condition of life often have very little
      character—at least none in particular developed. Because, after all, it’s talking and jawing
      about things which don’t matter a pin that develops our character. The people who have no
      opportunity for that remain quite
       without character, until some day they are forced to choose
      whether they’ll be self‐sacrificing creatures or mean pigs.”
“There’s something in that,” answered Hamlin, tearing up his abortive sketches in a huff;
      “but it is hard that a man should be unable to copy the shape of a handsome face
      as he would copy the shape of a handsome vase, without wondering what there may be
      inside.”
The fact was, that the utter silence of his model, and his own utter silence, except when
      begging her to turn a little more in this direction or that, made Hamlin nervous. He had, of
      course, sketched and painted scores of people who had sat as utterly silent as Anne Brown, but
      then Anne Brown was not a model of that kind. Indifferent as he felt towards the hidden
      reality of this girl, he was, nevertheless, fully conscious that she was a personality,
      something much more than a mere form; or rather, the form itself was suggestive of something
      more. It would be an easy thing to have to sketch Michaelangelo’s Dawn, or
       his Delphic Sibyl become living flesh, in utter silence with
      those eyes fixed upon one. If only he could speak to her, or make her speak, he was persuaded
      it would be much easier; but for some unaccountable reason it seemed impossible to set up a
      conversation. One morning accident came to Hamlin’s assistance. Strolling about after
      breakfast, he found in a corner of the vineyard, where the trampled grass revealed the recent
      presence of the little Perrys, a couple of books carefully buried under a heap of dead leaves
      just where he chanced to walk. The children had evidently hidden them out of mischief. One was
      a cheap copy of Dante, with notes—the other an Italian grammar. Turning to the fly‐leaf he
      found, written in a curious hand, a stiff imitation of English tradesmen’s writing, the name
      “Anne Brown.” He wiped the books, for they were wet with dew, and deposited them upon the
      window‐sill of the nursery. At half‐past nine the girl came to the studio. She had been
      sitting a little while, when Hamlin,
       bending over his work, suddenly broke the silence—
“I find we have a common friend, Miss Brown,” he said.
The girl, without stirring, opened her large eyes.
“A common friend?” she asked, with a scarcely perceptible agitation in her quiet manner;
      then added, “I suppose you mean Mr Perry; I haven’t many friends now anywhere.”
“Oh! this is the friend of a great many people—thousands—besides ourselves, so you need not
      feel jealous; his name is Dante.”
“Indeed!” answered Anne Brown, and relapsed into silence.
But silence did not suit Hamlin. “I found two books belonging to you in the vineyard early
      this morning,” he continued; “and I put them on the nursery window‐sill.”
“Thank you,” replied Miss Brown, in her taciturn manner; “I missed them last night.”
“I was indiscreet enough to wonder whether
       you and I cared for the same things in Dante,” pursued
      Hamlin; “so I ventured to open the book. I found you had marked the passage about
      Provenzano.”
“Yes,” said Miss Brown.
“How is it that you marked Provenzano, and did not mark Ugolino, I wonder?”
“I don’t care about Ugolino. He was a traitor.”
“Do you consider that traitors ought to be starved to death?” asked Hamlin, with a
      smile.
“I don’t think any one ought to be starved to death,” she answered very seriously; “it is
      too dreadful. But I don’t care about Ugolino, because he was a traitor; and the Archbishop was
      a traitor too. There is no one to be glad or sorry about.”
“And Francesca da Rimini? Do you find there is nothing to care for or be sorry about in
      her?”
A faint redness welled up under the uniform brown pallor of Anne Brown’s face.
“The husband was quite right,” she said, after a pause.
“You are very severe,” remarked Hamlin—“much more severe than Dante. He was sorry for
      them.”
“They were quite happy,” she answered. “They did not mind being killed; they did not mind
      being driven about in the wind, of course”—then she stopped short suddenly.
“Why of course?” and Hamlin went on scraping at his pencil.
“Because I don’t think one would mind, if people cared for one, being driven about in the
      wind like that. Lots of people have been driven about in revolutions, and put into dungeons
      together, and so on. If they had put papa in prison, I should have wanted to go in with
      him,”—for once she spoke with a certain amount of vehemence.
Hamlin looked up from his pencil‐cutting. The expression which he suddenly met in her face
      made him feel that at last he had what he wanted. It was a curious mixture, possible
       only in those strange features, of a kind of passionate
      effort with dogged determination: the head a little lifted, cheeks and lips firmly set; but in
      the eyes, and even in the curl of the close‐set lips, a sort of strain, as of a person trying
      to inhale a larger amount of air, or to take in a larger sight. In a second it was gone.
“That is what I want!” thought Hamlin; “the Amazon or Valkyr—as I thought.”
“Tell me why you care for Provenzano,” he went on, now much more interested in his work
      again.
“Because he was so proud, and did not like to do humble things,” she answered; “and yet he
      begged in the streets for a ransom for his friend.”
She showed no desire to say more, and Hamlin was now engrossed in his work. They exchanged
      but a few trivial remarks during the rest of the sitting. The girl seemed to have contracted a
      habit of silence, to break through which required a positive effort. When the
       sitting had come to an end, Hamlin asked whether she could
      possibly give him another.
She hesitated. “If Mrs Perry wishes it, of course,” she answered.
“Excuse me,” corrected Hamlin. “Mrs Perry’s consent may be necessary for you; but for me,
      the sitting depends upon your wishes, Miss Brown.”
“I don’t care one way or another,” she answered hurriedly.
Mrs Perry of course gave her consent.
She had carefully collected and pieced the scattered remnants of yesterday’s abortive
      sketches, and Hamlin found her pasting them on to cardboard.
“Do let me keep them, dear Mr Hamlin,” cried Mrs Perry; “they are the most precious things I
      possess.”
“They are horrible rubbish;” and Hamlin rudely tore them to shreds. “If you want something
      of mine, I will make you a sketch of little Winnie—only please don’t keep these fearful
      things.”
“Thank you, thank you so much!” she exclaimed—“but oh, mayn’t I keep this? it
      is such a lovely head!”
“It’s the head of Miss Brown,” he answered angrily. “You don’t care for it much on her
      shoulders,—why should you care for it on my paper—an abominable caricature? Really, I must be
      permitted to tear it up”—and he tore it into a heap of little pieces.
The next day but one he had another sitting from Anne Brown; and he was so pleased with his
      drawing, that he begged for permission to finish it in colours. During these additional
      sittings there was not much conversation. The Dante topic was perfectly worn to shreds, till
      at last it seemed as if it could be made to go no further. In despair, Hamlin remembered the
      Italian grammar which he had picked up together with the Dante.
“What do you want with an Italian grammer?” he asked. “You surely don’t require to study it
      yourself, Miss Brown?”
“I want to teach some day,” she answered.
“Do you mean to teach the Perry children?”
“Oh no—to teach, to be a daily governess, what we call a parlatrice here. It is not difficult. The lessons are all conversation. Many
      English ladies want those sort of lessons. I know a girl, the daughter of Mrs Perry’s
      dressmaker, who gives ten lessons every day, and and gets two francs a lesson.”
“Ten lessons a‐day! But that’s fearful. What awful slavery! Surely you don’t want to do
      that?”
“I wish I could. I should be so happy.”
“Then you want to leave the Perrys?”
“I want to give up being a servant.”
Hamlin paused, and looked at this superb and regal creature. He did not know what to
      say.
“You don’t care for children?” he asked at random.
“I don’t know. I don’t care for these children,” she answered bluntly.
“I thought women always liked children.”
She smiled bitterly.
“Oh,” she said, “children are worse sometimes than grown people; and then one can’t resent
      it, or answer bad words, or strike them, just because they are children.”
“Then you think you would prefer being a teacher of Italian?”
“Oh yes, I must become that some day; I study when I have a little time. A teacher talks
      with ladies, and talks about all sorts of things.”
“How do you mean—about all sorts of things?”
“About things—which are not things to eat, or mend, or clean,—about books, and places, and
      people.”
Hamlin could not help smiling. “Is that such a rare pleasure?” he asked, thinking not of the
      girl with whom he was talking, but of those weary æsthetic discussions which he had left
      behind him in London.
“Miss Curzon used to talk about books to me—and about music, sometimes,” said the girl. “She
      made me read Shakespeare with her. That is long, long ago.”
“And since then. Do you never talk about such things?”
“Never.”
“Never?”
Anne Brown raised her eyes quietly. “Never, except with you, sir.”
Hamlin did not answer.
Towards the end of the sitting, he suddenly looked up.
“Have you ever read the ‘Vita Nuova,’ Miss Brown?” he asked.
“What’s the ‘Vita Nuova’?”
“It is a little book by Dante, in prose and verse, telling how he met Beatrice, and then how
      she died. It is much more beautiful than the ‘Divina Commedia.’”
She looked incredulous.
“Is it more beautiful than Bertran del Bornio, where he carried his head like a lantern? Or
      Bocca degli Abati, where they all change into snakes? Or Cacciaguida when he prophesies about
      Dante’s exile?”
“It is quite different—all about beautiful things, and love.”
“I don’t care for that.”
“You must read it some day, though.”
Miss Brown was silent, and relapsed into her usual sullen appearance.
“I say, Hamlin, old fellow,” said Perry, as they walked up and down in the garden that
      evening, “do you care to see the festival at Lucca to‐morrow? I’m going to take the children
      in for a treat, and I shall take Annie too—for she never gets any amusement, poor girl. I’ve
      hired a waggonette—will you be of the party?”
“Will you let me think about it, Perry? I don’t much go in for festivals.”
“This is a picturesque affair—really worth seeing.”
“By the way,” asked Hamlin, “I have nearly finished my sketch of Miss Brown, and I should
      like—I suppose I ought—to make her some little present.”
“I wouldn’t,” answered Melton Perry sharply; “she’s an odd girl, and you might just hurt her
      feelings. You see her father was a republican, and that sort of thing, so she’s got
       all sorts of notions about equality and so forth. Awful
      bosh, of course, but still I think it’s as well she should have them as not.”
“I didn’t mean any money,” said Hamlin, feeling himself grow red at the mere thought.
“Then, if you will run the risk, give her some school‐books. You know she wants to set up as
      a teacher. Grammars—that sort of thing.”
Hamlin made a gesture of disgust.
“Horrible!—to give her grammars!”
“It’s what she wants.”
“Why, it would seem—well—it would be like encouraging her to become a daily governess.”
“That’s just what I wish to do.”
Hamlin did not answer. The idea of Anne Brown giving lessons at two francs the hour jarred
      upon him.
EARLY the following morning Hamlin was awakened by the wheels of the waggonette and
      the bells of the horses. Then came the excited voices of children; the sound of slammed doors
      and precipitate steps on the stairs; and finally the rattle and jingle of departure. He had
      declined being one of the boisterous expedition to Lucca, for he detested children in general,
      and the little Perrys in particular; and a day in the empty house (for Mrs Perry was going to
      see some friends at a neighbouring villa) had seemed to him delightful. He opened his shutters
      and saw, in the crisp pale‐blue morning, the carriage sweeping round the corner of a narrow
      lane, the children’s hats, Anne Brown’s red shawl, the coachman’s grey coat, brush rapidly
      along a tall box hedge.
       If there was a thing Hamlin hated more than another, it was
      a holiday, a crowd, a lot of people on a jaunt.
After breakfast he went to the studio and sat down before his sketches of Miss Brown. They
      were unsatisfactory, but they were as good as he could hope to make them. He had fancied that
      a coloured sketch of her head would be all that he could possibly want; but he now recognised
      that, after all, the head, beautiful and singular as it was, was yet the least part of the
      matter. It was the girl’s gait, her way of carrying her head and neck, her movements when at
      work, her postures when in repose—a number of things of which that head gave no indication,
      and which, indeed, it was difficult to render in painting, since it was all movement. He had
      scribbled a few lines—just fragmentary metaphors and scraps of description—suggested to him by
      Anne Brown, and wondered what use he would make of them; indeed, what use he could make of
      Anne Brown altogether. Here was a
       splendid model, a splendid heroine, but he was in the mood
      neither for painting nor for poetry writing. He put a background of dark bay trees to one of
      his sketches, and then regretted having put it in at all. He no longer felt inclined to work;
      and, all of a sudden, an unaccountable fancy struck him to follow the holiday‐makers—to go
      quietly into town—to see them, without, perhaps, letting himself be seen.
The sun was already high as he walked, or rather waded, along the dusty road, with its
      garlands of dust‐engrained vines hanging from tree to tree on either side; its dust‐stifled
      marsh‐flowers in the ditch; its white farmhouses, and white stone heaps, white upon white,
      brilliant, relentlessly white, under the deep blue autumn sky. Before him the bullock‐carts,
      with sleepy drivers prostrate on their back, moved in a white cloud; a whirlwind of dust was
      raised by every cariole, heavily laden with singing and yelling peasants, which dashed past.
      Within sight of the rampart trees, like a pleasant oasis of leafage in
       the treeless green desert of the town, the crowd of vehicles
      of all sorts began. Under the red brick gate, with its statue of Justice and motto “Libertas,”
      there was a perfect block of carts, gigs, bullocks, horses, and screaming country folk. Hamlin
      wriggled through, and slipped along in the scant shade of the narrower streets—empty and
      desolate on that holiday—ribbons of brilliant light cut into, bordered by the black shadows of
      overhanging roofs and balconies. A great buzz of voices came from the square of the cathedral;
      peasants and townsfolk elbowing about, people at booths yelling their wares, boys screeching
      on whistles and trumpets, cathedral bell tolling, and all the neighbouring church bells
      clattering and jangling. From the windows of the blackened palaces fluttered strips of crimson
      and yellow brocade; across the street, from balcony to balcony, and from twisted iron
      torchholder to twisted iron bridle‐ring, were slung garlands of coloured lamps for the
      evening’s illumination; and in the
       midst of all rose the cathedral front, its tiers and tiers
      of twisted and sculptured pillarets, with the massive grey belfry soaring by its side into the
      high blue sky. Hamlin pushed his way in at one of the side gates; a rolling of organs, and
      quavering of choir voices, and clash of brass instruments; a hot mouthful of heavy,
      incense‐laden atmosphere; a compact moving human mass beneath the Gothic arches; beams of
      light flickering among clouds of dust, and incense and taper smoke high in the arched nave;
      constellations of lights on altar, and organ‐loft, and chandelier, yellow specks in the
      mid‐day twilight of the cathedral; something tawdry, hushed, unbreathable, and yet impressive
      and beautiful.
Hamlin gradually made his way to the side of the altar‐steps. This part of the cathedral was
      full of women—provincial great ladies, and shopkeepers’ wives and daughters in their Sunday
      clothes, brilliant caricatures of last year’s Paris fashions—close packed together on reserved
      seats, enjoying the incense, the
       lights, the music, the holiness of the ceremony, the clothes
      of their neighbours, the appealing glances of the young men in elaborate silk and alpaca
      summer coats, with artistically combed‐up heads of hair, sucking their canes all about the
      altar. Hamlin’s entry, however quiet, was soon perceived, and the eyes of all this womankind
      were fixed upon the sight, rare in that country town, of an Englishman; and white silk
      bonnets, and black lace veils, and big red fans, and fuzzy yellow and smooth black heads,
      leant towards each other,—while questions went round in a whisper, who was the forestiere—the handsome forestiere—small, slight, meagre, white, with the light hair and moustache, and
      that melancholy face like a woman’s? Hamlin was quickly bored by all this magnificence;
      jostled to pieces, stifled by the heat, and incense, and heavy smell of the crowd. He was
      going out, when, as his eyes wandered from the silver and lights of the altar, and the shining
      mitres and stoles of the priests, to that sea of heads and bonnets and
       hats in the nave, they were suddenly and unexpectedly
      arrested on the side steps of the high altar just opposite to him. There, among a lot of
      heads, but high above them, was a head half covered with coarse black lace and crisp dark hair
      half turned away from him; a majestic sweep of cheek and jaw, a solemn bend of neck. A moment
      later the bell tinkled for the elevation of the Host, the organ burst forth into a rapid jig,
      and the church was a sea of bent heads, of kneeling and stooping men and women. As the people
      suddenly sank like a wave about the steps, there remained, stranded as it were, and rising
      conspicuous, the tall and massive figure of Miss Brown. She was standing on the altar‐steps,
      whose orange‐red baize cloth threw up faint yellowish tints on to her long dress of some kind
      of soft white wool, while the crimson brocade on wall and column formed a sort of dull red
      background. In the mixed light of the yellow tapers and the grey incense‐laden sunbeams, her
      face acquired a diaphanous pallor, as if of a halo surrounding
       it, as she stood, her hands hanging loosely clasped, looking
      calmly upon the bowed‐down crowd below. One minute, and the bell tinkling again, the people
      rose with a muffled, shuffling noise, and hid her from Hamlin. The organ and bells were
      pealing, the voices and violins rising shrill, the incense curling up in grey spirals into the
      sunbeams among the crimson hangings. The sonnet of Guido Cavalcanti, about the Madonna
      picture, enshrined at Or San Michele behind the blazing tapers, and in which he recognised his
      lady, came into Hamlin’s mind, with the sound of the music and the fumes of the incense; and
      together with it, a remembrance, a sort of picture, hopelessly jumbled, of Laura in the church
      at Avignon that Good Friday, and Beatrice among the blazing lights of the Heavenly Rose. The
      Mass was over, and people began to stir and leave the cathedral. Why had she remained standing
      while all the others had knelt? Perhaps from some Scotch puritanism; it was incongruous,
      thought Hamlin. But at the same time
       he felt that, while incongruous in one way—for she ought
      certainly to have knelt like the others—it had in another respect completed an effect; this
      disbelieving girl had herself become, as it were, the Madonna of the place. He stood aside and
      let the crowd slowly pass out. Suddenly he saw, among the moving sea of heads, the flaxen
      curls of the little Perrys—the reddish beard of Melton Perry—the head, half covered with black
      lace and towering above the others, of Miss Brown. She was leading the two smaller children,
      and looked anxious in that great crowd. Up went one of the little yellow heads; she had taken
      the child in her arms. All of a sudden her eyes caught those of Hamlin standing close by, and
      yet separated from him by an impassable gulf of people. Her own lit up, and with them her
      whole face, in a smile, which he had never seen before. At last, near the church door, the
      crowd bore his friends straight towards him.
“What! here after all!” cried Perry. “Up to some mischief, you cunning dog!”
“Up to the mischief of watching these good people’s devotion,” answered Hamlin.
“Why did you come?” asked the children eagerly.
“I suppose because I thought I should like to amuse myself after all,” answered Hamlin.
They were out on the cathedral steps, in the full glare of the blue sky. Outside a fountain
      was playing, penny whistles and trumpets shrilled on all sides, and the people at the stalls
      shrieked and bellowed out their wares to the motley crowd pouring out of the church. The
      children cast eyes of longing upon the booths, decorated with tricolour flags and sprigs of
      green, full of gaudy dolls, and squeaking wooden dogs, and tin trumpets, and drums; upon the
      tables, covered with bottles shaped like pyramids, and china men, and Garibaldi busts, full of
      red and yellow and green stuff, and with piles of cakes with little pictures of saints stuck
      in the middle of them.
“Buy us something,” cried the little ones to their father and Hamlin; and they squeezed
       through the crowd, and began to hesitate before the varied
      splendours of the fair.
“You look very happy, Miss Brown,” said Hamlin, as they were waiting while the children made
      their choice. For really the girl looked quite radiant,—an expression of unwonted happiness,
      of freedom and amusement, shone through her quiet, almost solemn, face, like sunshine through
      a thin film of mist, all the richer for being half suppressed.
“It is all so beautiful,” she answered, looking round at the square surrounded by high black
      palaces draped with crimson brocade, and terraces covered with green, and at the cathedral,
      carved like a precious casket, beneath the blue sky.
“Not more beautiful than at the Villa Arnolfini, surely?”
She paused.
“No, not more beautiful; but more—I don’t know what.”
“More cheerful?”
She shook her head. “Yes; but not so
       much that; more free—more—I don’t know how to call it.”
The children were laden with lollipops and sixpenny toys.
“Come,” said Perry suddenly, very cheerful, in his unaccustomed freedom from his better
      half, “you must choose a fairing, Annie. What will you have?—a doll?—a beautiful yellow
      ’kerchief with purple flowers, warranted the very worst colours in creation? some
      gingerbread?—a penny whistle? No, I’m sure you’re dying for some literature”—and he turned to
      a stone bench under a palace, where twopenny books were piled up, and quantities of leaflets
      of ballads, and lives of saints, and romantic histories, were strung to the wall.
“Oh!” he said, “there’s nothing for Annie here—she hates saints and knights and poetry; we
      must get her a book on the ‘Rights of Man,’ or a ‘History of the French Revolution,’ at the
      bookseller’s in Via Fillungo. But this is just what suits Hamlin”—and throwing
       down a heap of coppers, he filled his hands with printed
      leaflets. “The tremendous adventures of the Giant Ferracciù,” he read; “the lamentable history
      of Lucia of Lamermoor; the loves of Irminda and Astolfo; the complaint of the beautiful
      Fair‐haired One,—these are the things for a poet,” and he stuffed them into Hamlin’s
      pockets.
“Don’t be ridiculous, Melton,” cried Hamlin.
“Ridiculous!” exclaimed Perry. “Who talks of things being ridiculous? I’m in good
      earnest”—and as they went along he began declaiming, with appropriate gestures, a ballad
      composed by some printer’s prentice from the libretto of an old opera.
The children shrieked with laughter at papa’s voice and faces; and Anne Brown burst into a
      curious subdued laugh, which, although scarcely audible, was extremely childish.
As they walked along the narrow crowded streets towards the inn where they were to
       have dinner, Perry kept on ahead with the two elder
      children, and Hamlin hung back with Miss Brown and the two younger.
“Did you like the ceremony in the cathedral, Miss Brown?” he asked, irresistibly drawn on to
      understand why she had not knelt like the others.
“It was very beautiful,” she said; “and such beautiful vestments! Did you see the white and
      gold embroidery of the bishop?—and the purple dresses of the canons?—oh, it was lovely! But it
      makes me angry to see such things.”
“Why so?”
“Because it is dreadful—don’t you think?—to see all those people kneeling down and believing
      in all that nonsense.”
“How do you know it is nonsense? It seems to me very beautiful and consoling.”
She turned her big grey‐blue eyes upon him. “You don’t mean that you believe in all that
      mummery?” she asked, searchingly and reproachfully—“you who have studied so much;
       you don’t believe that they can make God come down with
      their mutterings and kneelings?”
“I don’t believe it,” answered Hamlin, with some embarrassment; “but I think it is very
      beautiful, and those who do believe in it are very happy.”
“But you don’t think it is right that people should believe in falsehoods, and be the slaves
      of wicked priests?”
“How rabid you are!” laughed Hamlin. “No, I don’t believe; but I like to see others
      believing.”
“I don’t;” and after a minute she added, “Don’t you believe in anything at all?”
“Perhaps I do,” he said, fixing his eyes upon her. “I believe in beauty—I believe that is
      the one true thing in life.”
“I don’t know what you mean,” she answered; “but it seems to me dreadful that people should
      believe in priests and kings, and all sorts of lies.”
They relapsed into silence. As they walked along, Hamlin stole glances at his companion,
       walking stately and serious like a saint or a sibyl by his
      side. He wondered what this girl would have been had she lived three or four centuries back.
      All this common modern radicalism distressed him in her—it had no colour and no perfume. Yet,
      after all, it was but the modern accessory instead of the medieval. This was the way in which
      beauty and romance were wasted nowadays—wasted, he thought, half consciously, yet not perhaps
      entirely, since it went to make up a characteristic whole.
Melton Perry took them to the chief inn of the place for dinner. He let each of the children
      choose whatever she preferred, ordered several bottles of Asti
       spumante, and gave it them to drink in champagne‐glasses. The one or two furtive
      English spinsters who were sipping their tea and reading their “Murray” at the other tables of
      the huge dining‐room, profusely ornamented with casts from the antique, and with cut‐paper
      fiy‐floppers, looked up with surprise at the festive party headed by Perry.
       After dinner the two little ones began to hang their heads
      in the hot room, and gave signs of going to sleep.
“Good gracious!” said Perry, in a consternation, “what are we to do with these wretched
      infants? They’ll just prevent our taking a stroll in the town before returning home.”
“I think the best thing will be for them to sleep a little, sir,” suggested Anne Brown. “I
      will tuck them up on the sofa, and stay with them here while you and Mr Hamlin take Miss
      Mildred and Miss Winnie for a walk.”
“But I can’t think of leaving you behind, Annie,” cried Perry., “I know how much you would
      like to see the town.”
“I saw part of it this morning,” she swered; “and I really would just as soon stay with the
      children here.” There was no gainsaying her; so the two men sallied forth with the two elder
      children on a walk through the crowded and bannered streets; while Anne Brown remained sitting
      in the stuffy inn dining‐room by the side of the torpid little
       ones. When they were out an idea suddenly struck Hamlin:
      this was the opportunity of getting a present for Anne Brown. He left Perry regaling the
      children on ices at a café opposite the Church of St
      Michael, which rose like a great marble bride‐cake into the bright blue sky, and made his way
      to a bookstall which he had noticed in the morning. He asked for the ‘Vita Nuova.’ The old
      bookseller looked over a number of little schedules in his desk, and produced several copies,
      new and second‐hand. They did not please Hamlin. At last he displayed a tiny Giunti volume,
      just delicately yellowed by age, and bound in vellum. Hamlin bought it, and secreted it in his
      pocket, and then joined Perry.
They went to the stable, where all the carioles from the country put up, and ordered the
      waggonette to be at the inn door in an hour. But as they were slowly mounting the wide stone
      staircase, with the eternal plaster dancing nymphs tripping it on each landing, Perry’s eye
      fell upon a large bill pasted upon the
       opposite wall,—the playbill of the Teatro del Giglio,—on
      which, among the names of singers, fiddlers, chorus‐directors, scene‐painters, theatre
      tailors, and hairdressers, streamed, in scarlet letters, the title “Semiramide.”
“Tò!” cried Milton Perry, with the Tuscan expression for a
      sudden bright thought; “what do you two young minxes say to going to hear an opera for the
      first time in your lives?”
“Oh, papa!” shrilled Mildred.
“Oh, papa!” echoed Winnie, catching hold of his knees—
“Not so quick!” exclaimed Perry; “I’m by no means so sure of it. What’s to become of the two
      sleepy little worms?”
“Send them home with Annie,” suggested Mildred, promptly; “and you’ll take us home
      later.”
“Nothing of the kind, my young woman,” he answered sternly. “If any one goes to the opera it
      shall be Annie. Make up your mind for that.”
The dining‐room was deserted. On a sofa
       near the open window lay the two tiny girls, propped up with
      cushions; Anne Brown, surly, flopping away the flies which buzzed about them, and reading a
      newspaper. She was resting the paper on her knees, and supporting her head with one hand,
      while the other moved slowly with the cut‐paper flopper; and in this position the young
      nursemaid struck Hamlin as a resuscitation, but more beautiful and even stranger, of one of
      Michaelangelo’s prophetic women.
“I say, Annie,”’ cried Perry, “what do you say to taking these two brats to the opera this
      evening?”
Anne Brown started up.
“To the opera, sir?” she cried, flushing with pleasure.
“Yes; these creatures have never been. They’re giving ‘Semiramide’ to‐night. I think it’s a
      good opera for children to begin with; because it will teach them betimes the unhappy
      complications which are apt to result from murdering one’s husband, and trying
       to marry one’s son unawares. I’ll take the little ones back
      to the villa in half an hour, and quiet Mrs Perry’s feelings. Mr Hamlin will be delighted to
      accompany you and mesdemoiselles my daughters, to the theatre, and then bring you home. It
      won’t last late.”
“But,” exclaimed Anne Brown,—“ oh, how good of you, sir!—but are you sure you would not like
      to stay for the opera yourself? I could take the little ones home.”
“No, thank you, Annie. The fact is, I never have approved of Rossini’s music.
      Ever since my earliest infancy I have been shocked by its want of earnestness; what I like is
      a symphony in P minor, with plenty of chords of the diminished seventeenth. That’s the right
      sort of thing, isn’t it, Hamlin?”
A few minutes later Perry went away with the two little girls, leaving Mildred and Winhie
      with Anne Brown. Hamlin accompanied them down‐stairs to the waggonette.
“I will go to the theatre and secure a box,” he said, “and order a trap to take us
      back.”
“All right!” cried Perry, as the waggonette rolled off. “Mind you don’t let those children
      bore you or worry poor Annie too much; and don’t leave them alone the whole afternoon.”
But, for some unaccountable reason, Hamlin did leave them alone the whole afternoon. After
      he had secured the box and ordered the carriage, he felt a sort of unwillingness to go back to
      the inn, perhaps unconsciously, to sit opposite the Perrys’ nursemaid; so he walked about the
      town till tea‐time, not troubling himself to inquire whether Anne Brown and the children might
      not prefer a stroll on the ramparts to the monotony of sitting for two mortal hours in the inn
      dining‐room.
AT dusk they hurriedly drank some of the thin yellow hotel‐tea; and then hastened
      to the theatre across the twilit street and square, where the garlands of Venetian lanterns
      were beginning to shine like jewels against the pale‐blue evening sky. Hamlin offered Anne
      Brown his arm, but she asked him to give it to Winnie Perry.
“Mildred shall take mine,” she said—“that’s the best way in case of a crowd.”
A crowd, alas! there was not; the liveried theatre servants (doubtless the same, in yellow
      striped waistcoats and drab gaiters, who carried out Semiramis’s throne, when the drop‐scene
      fell) made profuse bows to the little party, and handed them at least half‐a‐dozen playbills
      , each as large as an ordinary flag. The children had never
      been in a theatre before, and were in a high state of delight at the lights, the gilding, the
      red plush, the scraping of fiddles; especially at being in a box, although the box on this
      occasion cost only about half as much as would a single seat in an English playhouse.
      Gradually the theatre filled; the boxes with people of quality from surrounding villas,
      gentlemen displaying an ampleness of shirt‐front, and ladies an ampleness of bosom conceivable
      only by the provincial mind; the pit with townsfolk and officers: the whole company staring
      with eyes and opera‐glasses, talking, singing, rapping with sticks and sabres till the
      overture began to roll out, when the audience immediately set up a kind of confused hum,
      supposed to be the melody of the piece, and which half drowned the meagre orchestra.
Then the opera began—an opera such as only the misery and genius of Italy could produce.
      There was a triumphal procession of six
       ragamuffins in cotton trousers and with brass kettle‐covers
      on their heads, marching round and round the stage, bearing trophies of paper altar‐flowers
      and coffee‐biggins; there was a row of loathsome females, bloated or fleshless, in draggled
      robes too short or too long, shrieking out of tune in the queen’s chamber—and four
      rapscallions in nightgowns and Tam‐o’Shanters, and beards which would not stick on, standing
      round the little spirit‐lamp burning in front of Baal’s statue; there was the little black
      leathern portmanteau containing the Babylonian regalia, which a nigger with a black‐crape face
      carried after the Prince Arsaces; and there was the “magnificent apartment in the palace of
      Nineveh, disclosing a delicious view of the famous hanging gardens,” as described by the
      libretto, and furnished solely with a rush‐bottomed chair and a deal table, the table‐cloth of
      which was so short that Semiramis was obliged to lean her arm on it to prevent its slipping
      off, which, however, it finally did. Moreover, an incalculable
       amount of singing out of tune and pummelling one’s chest in
      moments of passion. No training, no dresses, no scenery, no orchestra. Still in this miserable
      performance there was an element of beauty and dignity, a something in harmony with the grand
      situation and glorious music: a splendidly made Semiramis, quite regal in her tawdry robes,
      who showered out volleys of roulades as a bird might shower
      out its trills; another young woman, plain, tall, and slight, playing the prince in corselet
      and helmet, with quite magnificent attitudes of defiance and command, with bare extended arm
      and supple wrist. The two girls who played the principal parts were sisters, and although they
      had certainly never sung much with a teacher, they must have sung a great deal together; and
      their voices and style melted into each other quite as if it were all a spontaneous effusion
      on their part. All the realities which money can get, dress, voice, training, accessories,
      scenery, utterly wanting; but instead, in the midst of pauperism, something which money
       cannot always get, a certain ideal beauty and charm. Anne
      Brown was intensely interested in the performance; indeed, quite as much so, though in another
      way, as the children. During the intervals between the acts, she could speak of nothing but
      the story of Semiramis, and wonder what would happen next. Hamlin could scarcely help laughing
      at the concern which she manifested each time that the hero Arsace was bullied by the wicked
      Assur; but he could not laugh at the tragic way in which she conceived the whole situation. To
      him all that florid music of Rossini would already have destroyed any seriousness there might
      have been in the matter; but to Anne Brown it seemed as if all these splendid vocalisations
      took the place of the visible pomp and magnificence of Assyrian royalty: for her the heroes
      and heroines, the magi and satraps, were clad, not in the calico and tinsel of the theatre
      tailor, but in the musical splendours of Rossini. Hamlin, to say the truth, found the
      performance very wearisome; he had been
       bored by Semiramide too often with Tietiens and Trebelli,
      to find it particularly interesting at the Teatro del Giglio of Lucca. He sat looking on
      listlessly, not so much at the stage as at the girl who was leaning out of the box before him,
      watching each movement of her hand and neck, as she devoured the performance with eyes and
      ears. But when at last there came the grand scene between Semiramis and her son, whatsoever
      was good in the performance suddenly burst forth; the two young women sang with a sort of
      spontaneous passion, a delight in the music and their own voices and themselves; and when,
      Semiramis having let down her back hair (as distressed heroines always do) from utter despair,
      Prince Arsaces, not to be outdone, pulled off his helmet, letting down his or her back hair
      also, and the two sank into each other’s arms and began the great duet, even Hamlin felt in a
      kind of way that this was passionate, and tragic, and grand. Anne Brown was seated sidewise in
      the front of the box, resting her mass
       of iron‐black hair on her hand, her other hand lying
      loosely on her knees. Her chest heaved under her lace mantilla, and her parted lips quivered.
      It seemed to Hamlin as if this were the real Semiramis, the real mysterious king‐woman of
      antiquity—as if the music belonged in some sort of ideal way to her. When the curtain had
      fallen amid the yells of applause, she remained silent, letting Hamlin help her on with her
      shawl without turning her eyes from the stage. The lights were rapidly put out.
“We must go, Miss Brown,” cried Hamlin, “otherwise we shall be left in the dark.”
She turned, took little Winnie by the hand, and followed him, who led the elder Perry child,
      prattling loudly, to the stairs. There was a great crowd going down, whistling and humming
      tunes from the opera. From the force of habit Hamlin again offered Anne Brown his arm. But
      instead of accepting it, she, so to speak, rapidly plucked little Winnie from the ground, and
      raised her in her arms as if she were a feather.
“Please let me carry that child,” cried Hamlin.
“Oh no,” she answered quietly. “I don’t mind carrying her at all; but she’s too heavy for
      you, sir.”
Out in the square the carriage was awaiting them in the bright starlight, where the red and
      green lamps were already dying out among the plane‐trees. In a minute they were rattling
      through the narrow streets, and out of the town by the dark tree‐masses of the bastions. The
      bells of the horses jingled as they went; the melancholy shrilling of insects rose from the
      fields all round; the vine‐garlands creaked in the wind. The two children were speedily
      asleep—one with her head on Hamlin’s shoulder, the other wrapped in her nurse’s shawl. Anne
      Brown bent over the side of the waggonette, a dark outline, the damp night breeze catching her
      hair. Neither spoke. Hamlin felt a sense of guilt stealing over him; of guilt for nothing very
      definite; of guilt towards no one else, but towards himself.
       The drive passed like a dream. Suddenly the wheels grated
      on the gravel of the villa garden; dogs barked; lights appeared; the children were lifted out
      of the carriage asleep; and the voice of Perry whispered to Hamlin—
“I caught it nicely when I came home—I don’t know why, upon my soul! I’m sure I wish I had
      remained and amused myself with you.”
“I wish you had,” said Hamlin quite seriously, always with the sense of vague guilt towards
      himself; then added,—
“By the way, old man, I fear I really must go on to Florence to‐morrow afternoon.”
PERRY could not at first understand his friend’s sudden decision, and violently
      combated it. But after a little while he said to himself that it must have been fearfully dull
      for Hamlin at the Villa Arnolfini, and that to have stayed so long was already much more than
      a miserable being like himself could expect. So that when his wife nearly went into hysterics
      at the notion of Hamlin—their poet‐painter, as she called him—suddenly departing, he
      represented to her, with more emphasis than was his wont, that Hamlin had bored himself to
      death, and must be bored no longer.
“And where are you going?” asked the limp and Sapphic lady, as they sat at lunch.
“I have no notion,” answered Hamlin. “I know nothing beyond Florence for three days. I may
      go on to Rome, Naples, Egypt, America, Japan, or return to Hammersmith. I have no notion.”
“Ah, these poets!” cried Mrs Perry; “they never can tell whither their soul may waft their
      body.”
When they had finished, Hamlin asked whether he might say good‐bye to Anne Brown. “I have a
      little farewell gift to make her,” he explained.
Anne Brown was summoned into the studio; she evidently had only just heard the news.
“Are you going away, sir, really?” she asked.
“Yes,” answered Hamlin, drily; “I expect the gig must be waiting for me already.”
“And—are you not going to return, Mr Hamlin?”
“Oh no; I think I shall go to America this winter.”
She was silent, and stood by the table in the attitude of a servant waiting for further
      orders.
“Before I go away,” said Hamlin, “I want to thank you, Miss Brown, for your kindness and
      patience, which have enabled me to make a sketch which will be very valuable for one of my
      next pictures, and,” he added, as she merely nodded her head, “I want to beg you to accept a
      little gift in remembrance of all the trouble I have given you.”
Anne Brown flushed, and her face suddenly changed, as if a whip‐cord had passed across
      it.
Hamlin took the little vellum‐bound volume from his pocket.
“You told me you had never read the ‘Vita Nuova,’ Miss Brown,” he said, “so I venture to ask
      you to accept this copy of it. I don’t know whether you like old books; I think them much
      prettier to look at. Good‐bye.”
The girl’s face cleared into a kind of radiance.
“Thank you so much,” she said; “I will read it often.”
“And think of me sometimes and the trouble I gave you?”
“It was my duty, since Mrs Perry wished it, sir. Good‐bye—a good journey to you.”
“Good‐bye, Miss Brown.”
WALTER HAMLIN did not go to America. On leaving the Villa Arnolfini, he met at
      Florence some artist friends, who, in his condition of utter absence of plans, easily drew him
      on with them to Siena and Perugia, thence into the smaller Umbrian cities, and finally into a
      wholly unexplored region between the Abruzzo and the Adriatic. By the time that their
      sketching and article‐writing expedition was at an end, the winter had come round, and more
      than three months had elapsed since Hamlin had parted with the Perrys. Would Hamlin return
      with his friends to England? He had often said that he had had enough of Italy—that he would
      go home and shut himself
       up in his studio at Hammersmith, among smoke and
      river‐fogs, seeing not a living creature, learning Persian and studying Sufi poets until next
      spring, when he would set off for the East, never more to return to Europe, except for the
      Grosvenor private view. But when the moment for return north approached, Hamlin began to
      hesitate; and the very day before his friends’ departure, he informed them that he had come to
      the conclusion that there was still some work for him to do in Italy.
“I shall be in England at the end of two months at latest,” he said.
And on their remonstrating at his fickleness, he merely answered—
“I have a notion for a new picture, and I think I have found my model for it.”
“‘The Queen of Night’ in your portfolio,” suggested one of his friends.
They had noticed and generally admired that strange head, the like of which none of them had
      ever seen before, and they had given the drawing, which Hamlin described
       merely as “a girl near Lucca,” the nickname of “The Queen
      of Night.”
“Yes,” answered Hamlin, “that’s the one I’m thinking about.”
So the rest of the party set sail from Civita Vecchia; and one drizzly, foggy morning,
      Hamlin got into the train to carry him northward to Florence.
During those three months, he could scarcely himself have explained when or how, strange
      notions had come into Hamlin’s head, and a still stranger plan had finally matured in it. He
      had been haunted by the remembrance of the Perrys’ nursemaid at the Villa Arnolfini, and
      gradually taken to brooding and day‐dreaming about her. He had made up his mind that Anne
      Brown was the most beautiful girl, in the strangest style, whom he had ever met. What was to
      be her future? Of two possibilities one must be realised. Either this magnificent blossom was
      to be untimely nipped,—this beautiful and strange girl was to fritter away her life,
      unnoticed, wasted, to
       little by little lose her beauty, her dignity, her
      grandeur, her whole imaginative aroma; or the rare plant of beauty was to be cherished, nursed
      into perfection, till it burst out in maturity of splendour, a thing of delight for the
      present and of wonder for the future. Either Anne Brown must turn into a sordid
      nursery‐governess, or into the avowedly most beautiful woman in England—that is to say, in the
      particular pre‐Raphaelite society which constituted England to him.
Yet not necessarily; there was still a middle course—she might marry some small shopkeeper
      or teacher of languages at Florence; or, perhaps, some artist might notice her, make her his
      mistress, perhaps his wife. This last thought of Anne Brown as the possible wife of some other
      Melton Perry (for they were all Melton Perrys at Florence) filled Hamlin with a vague disgust
      and irritation. Much better that she should end her life as a nursery‐maid, or a daily
      governess at a franc the hour. Still, it was dreadful to think that something so
       unique should be lost, wasted for ever. “Such things must
      be,” said Hamlin to himself; “it is sad, but it can’t be helped.” And he wrote two sonnets,
      “Lost Loveliness,” and “Stillborn Joy,” which were extremely beautiful, and quite among the
      finest he ever wrote. But this did not despatch the subject. The sense of having made the most
      of the fact that this loveliness was to be wasted, this joy of beauty to be stillborn, did not
      make up for the consciousness that the waste, the abortion, had not actually taken place,
      might yet be prevented, and were dreadful in themselves. Was he, Hamlin, to marry Anne Brown?
      He shrank in terror from so Quixotic, and at the same time so commonplace, so school‐girlish a
      thought. But if he did not marry her no other man could; at least, no other man who was to
      prevent the act of wastefulness to be consummated. She might marry a clerk, a shopkeeper, even
      a servant, or even some miserable little Anglo‐Florentine artist; but if she married a man
      above that, a man to appreciate and
       make the most of her, that man must evidently be himself.
      It is difficult to follow the logic of this notion; but certain it is that Hamlin never
      doubted for a second that either Anne Brown must bloom for him and by him, must be his most
      precious possession and his most precious loan to the world—or that Anne Brown must be simply
      and deliberately buried under a bushel. Such arguments are matters of character, I suppose; be
      it as it may, the argument was absolutely cogent.
When Hamlin had got thus far he stopped for a long time, revolving the matter in his mind in
      a purely abstract way, without attempting to realise how things might be settled. He was not a
      man of action or of resolves, and would usually let things slip on and look at them slipping;
      and during this ruminating condition, he did not once seriously ask himself whether he
      intended marrying the Perrys’ nursemaid. But suddenly, the very day before his friends were to
      carry him back to England, a new notion came into his head. His life seemed
       suddenly filled with romance. The matter was settled in a
      minute. Anne Brown was to be filched triumphantly from oblivion: he telegraphed Perry to hire
      him rooms in Florence. As the meeting of certain chemical substances will sometimes produce a
      new and undreamt‐of something of wholly unprecedented properties, so ideas had come in
      collision in Hamlin’s mind, and out of a mere perplexity had arisen a stranger scheme—out of
      the question what should be the fate of Anne Brown, had originated the decision what was to be
      the future of Walter Hamlin. The situations seemed changed: instead of his being a mere
      possible, but by no means probable, instrument of a change in her life, she was the
      predestined instrument for the consummation of his life. Anne Brown should live for the world
      and for fame; and Walter Hamlin’s life should be crowned by gradually endowing with vitality,
      and then wooing, awakening the love of this beautiful Galatea whose soul he had moulded, even
      as Pygmalion had moulded the limbs of
       the image which he had made to live and to love. The idea,
      once present to Hamlin’s mind, had been accepted at once; and in another hour he had worked
      out all the details of the real romance in which he was embarking; he had determined exactly
      where he would send Anne Brown to school, where he would go during her stay there, what
      settlements he would make to ensure her complete freedom of choice when she should choose him,
      in what part of London he would buy a house for her, which of his female relations should have
      charge of her, by whom she should be introduced into artistic society;—he began to imagine all
      the details of his long courtship. Beyond the courtship, into their actual married life, his
      fancy did not carry him; it was that year, or two or three years of gradually growing
      devotion, upon which he cared to dwell. Whether such a scheme was wise or right it never
      occurred to him to question. He had determined on educating, wooing, and marrying a woman like
      what Anne Brown seemed to be,
       as a man might determine to buy a house in a particular
      fishing or hunting district—the only thing is to make sure whether the particular house is the
      suitable house. The only further concern of Hamlin was to make sure that Anne Brown was really
      all that she seemed to him to be; and Hamlin looked forward as to a kind of preliminary
      romance to the strange inspection, this minute examination of a creature who should never
      guess the extraordinary metamorphosis which might, or might not, be in store for her.
A WEEK later Hamlin was painting Anne Brown in a studio which he had hired for
      three months. She had manifested some pleasure when, unexpectedly, Mrs Perry had told her of
      his return, and of his desire to have her once more for a model; but the manifestation thereof
      was so calm, or rather so mingled with her usual haughty indifference, that her romantic and
      passionate mistress had forthwith made up her mind that Anne Brown was a mere soulless body,
      and communicated that fact to her husband.
“I don’t see why Annie should be particularly delighted at the prospect of sitting for two
      hours, twice a‐week, with her head raised and her throat outstretched, in a beastly cold
       studio,” answered Perry, affecting, as he frequently did,
      from a curious kind of coyness, not to understand his wife’s underlying meaning.
“She is a mere soulless body,” repeated Mrs Perry—“as indifferent to Hamlin as a handsome
      cow would be.”
“Do you expect her to throw herself into Hamlin’s arms?” cried Perry, angrily.
“I expect her,” answered Mrs Perry, with a kind of haughty mystery and sadness, “to be a
      woman.”
“And I expect you to attend to her remaining what she is—an honest girl,” retorted
      Perry.
“Melton!” said his wife solemnly; and immediately poor Perry’s principles drooped like a
      furled sail.
Melton Perry had always an uncomfortable feeling of responsibility regarding Anne Brown; a
      sort of sense that, as poor old Miss Curzon had been grievously mistaken in intrusting a girl
      like Anne Brown to a lady so mystical
       and romantic as his wife, he, on his part, hardened sinner,
      social wreck as he doubtless was, was in duty bound to make up for the good old woman’s want
      of discernment. If it had been any one except Hamlin, he repeated to himself, he would never
      have permitted a single sitting; but Hamlin was a Sir Galahad—at least with regard to servant
      girls and suchlike—who had always struck Perry dumb with wonder; and in this instance in
      particular, Hamlin seemed really to consider Anne Brown much in the light of a picture by an
      old master. Yet even thus, it had taken him by surprise, and relieved his mind of a heavy
      weight, when, the day before the first sitting in the studio, Ham]in had asked Mrs Perry to
      tell him of some elderly woman—some former housekeeper or nurse in an English family—who could
      come to his studio and keep it in order two or three times a‐week.
“I can recommend you a most delightful young laundress,” exclaimed Mrs Perry with
      fervour—“quite a Palma Vecchio.”
“Thank you,” answered Hamlin, drily; “I particularly want an elderly woman who can take
      charge of my things, and who can be there when—I mean, who can take Miss Brown’s bonnet and
      shawl when she comes to sit to me.”
Mrs Perry confessed to no knowledge of such a person, but sat down to write to the German
      deaconesses,—“such real saints,”—in quest of the desired piece of elderly respectability. But
      when she had gone to her writing‐table, Melton Perry kicked Hamlin’s foot under the table, and
      said in an undertone—
“You are a damned moral dog, certainly, Wat. Thank you so much, old fellow.”
So the old housekeeper was hired to go three times a‐week to Hamlin’s studio, and twice
      a‐week she opened the studio door to Anne Brown, and took the girl’s poke‐bonnet and grey
      shawl in the little anteroom, crammed full of dwarf orange‐trees, which opened into the
      pillared balcony circling round the topmost floor of the old palace, and from which
       you looked into the lichened court, and saw the steel‐like
      sheen of the water in the well. Hamlin had determined to embody one of his usual mystical
      fancies in his new picture. His pictures came to him first as poems, and he had written a
      sonnet descriptive of his intended work before he had painted a stroke of it. It was called
      Venus Victrix; and the strangeness, the mysteriousness which gave a charm to his beautiful
      church‐window‐like pictures, and made one forget for a minute the uncertainty of drawing and
      the weakness of flesh‐painting—this essential quality of the pictorial riddle depended very
      much upon the fact that his Venus Victrix was entirely unlike any other Venus Victrix which
      the mind of man could conceive. Instead of the naked goddess triumphing over the apple of
      Paris, whom such a name would lead you to expect, Hamlin made a sketch of a lady in a dress of
      sad‐coloured green and gold brocade, seated in a melancholy landscape of distant barren peaks,
      suffused with the grey and yellow tints
       of a late sunset; behind her was a bower of sear‐coloured
      palms, knotting their boughs into a kind of canopy for her head, and in her hand she held,
      dragged despondingly on the ground, a broken palm‐branch. The expression of the goddess of
      Love, since such she was, was one of intense melancholy. It was one of those pictures which go
      to the head with a perfectly unintelligible mystery, and which absolutely preclude all
      possibility of inquiring into their exact meaning. A picture which might have been one of
      Hamlin’s best, only that it was never finished.
For, it must be remembered, the picture, or rather the painting of it, was merely an excuse
      invented by Hamlin for an opportunity of seeing, of examining, the creature whose future was
      in his hands. He wished to assure himself that Anne Brown was really the Anne Brown of his
      fancy; and as he stared at that strange and beautiful face, it was not in reality with the
      object of transferring it on to his canvas, but to make sure whether it was
       really as strange as it seemed to him. It was also to gauge
      whatever mystery there might be hidden in that singular nature. Whether he ever did gauge it,
      it is impossible to tell. There was, he felt, something strange there—something which
      corresponded with the magnificent and mysterious outside,—a possibility of thought and emotion
      enclosed like the bud in its case of young leaves—a potential passion, good or bad, of some
      sort. At Anne Brown’s actual character it was difficult to get; or rather, perhaps, there was
      as yet but little actual character to get at. He became more and more persuaded, as he sat
      opposite to her, painting and talking—or, interrupting the sitting, playing to her strange
      songs which he had picked up in his travels, and fragments of forgotten operas which it was
      his mania to collect—that Anne Brown was in reality much younger than her years; that beneath
      those solemn features there was a still immature soul wrapped up in mere conventional ideas of
      right and wrong,
       a few inherited republican formulæ, and a natural pride
      which had grown, as does any protecting skin, physical or moral, where surroundings are for
      ever chafing and wearing. A soul, above all, which had never yet sought for an ideal—had never
      loved; and this knowledge was to Hamlin a source of infinite satisfaction.
It was a satisfaction, also, to notice how, little by little, whatever ideals seemed to bud
      in Anne Brown’s mind, were connected with him, or at least with the things which he presented
      to her imagination. Nay, with himself, as a person not at all, but yet with the books, the
      music, the pictures about which he talked to her. This studio, so unlike the bleak and
      tobacco‐reeking workshop of Melton Perry, with its curious carved furniture, its Japanese
      screens, its bits of brocade and tapestry (rubbish which Hamlin would have blushed at in
      London), its shelves of books and chipped majolica and glass, its quantity of flowers, was
      evidently a sort of earthly paradise to the
       girl. And the handsome, pale, serious young man, with
      womanishly regular feature and world‐worn look, who treated her with a sort of protecting
      deference, who instructed her in what she ought to like and dislike, and at the same time
      asked with real earnestness for her opinion, was evidently its affable archangel. This Hamlin
      perceived to his pleasure; but, nevertheless, he perceived also that all feeling, all ideas,
      were in Anne Brown vague, immature, or merely potential—unless, indeed, this tragic‐looking
      creature repressed and drowned in the darkness of her consciousness anything more definite and
      developed.
They did not talk very much, for they were both of them rather taciturn; but what they said
      acquired therefrom more than doubled importance. And of this talking Hamlin did by far the
      greater share. Anne Brown had indeed little to say—a nursery‐maid of nineteen has not much to
      tell a fashionable poet‐painter of thirty‐one: slight descriptions of places she had been to,
      villas, or bathing‐places, and one or two
       excursions from them; vague reminiscences of old Miss
      Curzon, of the books which she had made the girl read, the music she had heard, the anecdotes
      of Landor and Rossini and Malibran which the old lady had narrated; a few allusions, short and
      passionate, to her father; a few more, sullen and dreary, to her own future life;—that was all
      that poor Anne Brown could say.
For when he told her the plots of novels, and repeated scraps of poems to her, she scarcely
      ventured to give him her opinion. She was so earnest that she felt that only something worth
      saying should be said; and what things worth saying could she say to him?
“By the way,” said Hamlin one day, as she stood, tying her bonnet, and looking out over the
      sea of shingly roofs, the sudden gaps showing shady gardens far below, open loggias, between whose columns fluttered linen, and irregular rows
      of windows with herbs in broken ewers on their sills—“by the way, you have never
       told me how you liked the ‘Vita Nuova,’ Miss Brown.” He had
      talked of so many books, making her wonder and sometimes laugh at his account of them, but
      never about that, nor about his own.
“It is very beautiful,” she said, still looking out of the window—“but do you think it is
      true?”
“Why not?” he said.
“I don’t know—I don’t think there are men like that;” then she suddenly added, with a sort
      of melancholy humorous laugh, which was frequent with her, “I will make my pupils read it when
      I am a parlatrice. Those ladies will tell me their
      opinion.”
Hamlin was looking at her, as she still turned her massive head, with its waves of
      iron‐black hair, away from him, towards the light.
“Good‐bye,” she said, with her hand on the door‐latch.
“Stop a minute,” said Hamlin; and going
       to a book‐shelf, he got down a little green‐bound
      volume.
“I don’t know why,” he said, “but I should like you to read these. It is idiotic trash after
      the ‘Vita Nuova’—but it is mine.”
“Thank you,” she said. “I will bring it you back next sitting. I will cover the
      binding.”
“I want you to keep it. Won’t you do me that favour?”
She reddened all over her pale face.
“Thank you,” she said. “’It is very good of you.”
IT so happened that as Anne Brown was walking quickly home she was overtaken by
      Melton Perry.
“What’s that book, Annie?” he inquired, as they walked side by side.
“Mr Hamlin gave it me—it’s his poems.”
“Let me see.” Perry was more peremptory than usual.
He turned over the leaves as they went along, and then returned it to her.
“You may read that,” he said—“it’s sad trash, but you may read it. All poetry isn’t fit for
      women to read,” he added, by way of explanation.
The gift of this book somehow disturbed Perry’s equanimity.
“What made him give you that book?” he asked.
“I don’t know, sir. We were talking about the ‘Vita Nuova.’”
“A lot of confounded medieval twaddle,” cried Perry. “Why don’t you read ‘Lady Audley’s
      Secret’ or ‘The Heir of Redclyffe’? that’s the right sort of thing.”
She seemed hurt, and they were silent. Suddenly Perry said, with some roughness—
“I’m sorry to inconvenience Hamlin, but this will be the last of the sittings. I am going to
      send you to the sea‐side with the children in a day or two. Little May needs change of air.
      When you return, Mr Hamlin will be leaving Florence.”
“Yes, sir,” answered Anne Brown; and a kind of suppressed spasm passed across her face.
Perry saw it.
“It’s high time,” he said to himself.
Melton Perry could not screw up his courage
       till he and his wife and Hamlin had already finished dinner
      that evening.
“I say, Hamlin,” he began, lighting his pipe, while Mrs Perry artistically twisted a
      cigarette in her long brown fingers—“d’you think you could finish off that picture with only
      one more sitting? I’m sure Mrs Perry thinks it is time for the children to go down to the
      sea‐side—only, of course, she doesn’t like disturbing you in your work.”
“Go down to the sea‐side!” exclaimed Mrs Perry, not at all mollified by her husband’s
      deference; “who talks of going to the seaside? and what has that to do with his work?”
“You forget, my dear, that you said this morning that May requires change of air—and, of
      course, Annie will be required to take the children down to Viareggio. I am extremely sorry
      for you, old fellow, but I fear you must finish that picture—at least so far as Annie is
      concerned—by the beginning of next week.”
“I see,” answered Hamlin, briefly. For the first time in his life almost, he felt angry with
       his old friend; an unspeakable resentment at this
      interference with what he considered already as his.
“I see nothing of the sort,” burst out Mrs Perry; “I will never, never permit
      dear Hamlin’s masterpiece to be spoilt. I would rather take the children to the sea‐side
      myself—oh yes. I would rather they did not go at all. My children are the dearest things I
      possess, but I have no right selfishly to prefer their welfare to the completion of such a
      picture. I should never forgive myself. That unfinished picture, that strange, terrible Venus,
      would haunt me in my dreams, and I should hear the whole world asking me, ‘What have you done
      with a thing meant for our joy?’”
“Bosh!” cried Perry, stretching out his legs and puffing at his pipe—“rubbish! A fine thing
      if May gets low fever again: much you’ll think of Hamlin’s masterpiece then.”
“May shall not have fever,” answered Mrs Perry, haughtily; “and Hamlin’s masterpiece, which
      you choose to sneer at—”
“Oh, please, don’t bother about my masterpieces!” interposed Hamlin.
“—Shall not be sacrificed. You shall take the children to the sea‐side, Melton; and Annie
      shall continue to give him as many sittings as he may wish.” And then, passing over her
      husband’s nauseous existence, she began a mellifluous and irrelevant conversation with Hamlin
      across him.
But after two or three minutes Perry could stand it no longer.
“Damn your sea‐side!” he suddenly burst out.
“Melton!” shrieked Mrs Perry, falling back on her chair.
“Damn your sea‐side!” repeated Perry. “Haven’t you eyes in your head to understand that the
      sea‐side has nothing to do with the matter? The children no more require to go to Viareggio
      than I require to be made Khan of Tartary. What is required is that an honest girl, who was
      intrusted to us by an old friend, should not get to be talked of as a—”
“This loathsome coarseness is too much for me. Adieu, Mr Hamlin!” and Mrs Perry flounced out
      of the room.
“Lord deliver us from womankind!” exclaimed Perry, as the door shut upon his wife, and he
      fell back in his chair. “What a nice breakfast I shall have to‐morrow!”
Hamlin did not answer, but merely lit another cigarette, and looked into the smouldering
      fire.
“Hamlin, old boy,” resumed Perry, “don’t be down upon me. I really am confoundedly sorry to
      bother you—indeed I am; but—you see—about this girl—”
“I understand,” answered Hamlin, shortly; “don’t let’s talk about it.”
“But—please don’t be in a rage with me, Watty,” cried Perry, appealingly; “really I don’t
      know what to do. You see, it’s not as if she were an ordinary girl or an ordinary servant;
      then I should say—hang it, please yourself!”
“Sweet morals!” sneered Hamlin.
“But with her it’s different; I’m sure you must recognise that yourself. Now I don’t mean to
      say you are in the least to blame, or that the girl cares the least scrap about you; but
      still, this sort of thing won’t do. I know you’re the last man to do a dirty thing—indeed
      you’re the only man whom I would have permitted to go on so long. But then, quite without
      meaning anything, all that sitting, and talking, and discussing poetry and ‘Vita Nuova’
      together—without knowing it, it puts ideas into a girl’s head, makes her dissatisfied, that
      sort of thing, and the result is that she goes to the bad. And then, here in Florence
      especially, a girl’s none the better looked at for having sat, if even only to one man. People
      begin to talk (at the villa it was another matter), stories go round, and it becomes difficult
      for her to get a respectable situation.”
“You needn’t say any more,” cried Hamlin, with almost feminine impatience. All this gave him
      a sense of moral nausea.
“You understand, old fellow, I don’t mean
       it about you in particular,” persisted Perry; “indeed
      you’ve behaved like Sir Bors, Sir Percival, and Sir Galahad all rolled into one. But it’s the
      fatality of the circumstances, the beastly world about us. You’re not angry, are you, with
      me?”
“Not a bit,” answered Hamlin, quietly, minutely examining one of the pictures on the wall,
      which was not worth looking at, and had been thoroughly looked at by him already; “not a bit,
      my dear Perry. I suppose you have no objection to Miss Brown giving me one more morning?”
“Not the least—two, or even three, for the matter of that. I was only anxious not to spin
      out things indefinitely.”
“One more sitting will be more than enough,” answered Hamlin. “By the way, before I go, I
      want to do a drawing of little Mildred.”
IT was a cold and drizzling February morning that last sitting which Anne Brown was
      to give to Walter Hamlin. As the girl slowly mounted the well‐like stairs of the old tower
      palace, and saw the distant snow‐covered hills through the dim windows on the landings, she
      thought with sadness that this was the last time she should toil up to Hamlin’s studio. A
      lethargy weighed upon her, making her feel that everything was dreary and unreal, such as she
      had experienced only once or twice before, when one of the few holidays of her childhood had
      drawn to a close. The cheerless, colourless, eventless, joyless routine of ordinary life was
      about to close over, to engulf, her little island of brightness. She was longer
       than usual taking off her bonnet and cloak in the anteroom
      filled with orange‐trees, for she felt as if she must look at everything well one last time—at
      the bits of brocade and the photographs on the wall, the plaster‐casts on the shelf, the
      scarlet and purple anemones in the cracked china bow], the brass synagogue lamp hanging in the
      window.
“It is bad weather,” said Hamlin’s old housekeeper.
“Horrible,” answered Anne, looking vacantly through the window at the grey sky and wet
      roofs.
The old woman opened the studio door and drew the curtains. Hamlin, who was at a table
      writing, rose and came to meet his model.
“It is very good of you to come in such horrible weather, Miss Brown,” he said.
“It is the last sitting—I thought I ought not to miss it,” and she sat down at once in the
      arm‐chair of faded green velvet opposite Hamlin’s easel.
“Won’t you warm yourself a little?” he asked.
“No, thank you; I am not cold.”
Hamlin began to prepare his paints.
“You are going to Viareggio, Miss Brown,” he remarked.
“Yes; I believe I am.”
“You will enjoy the change of air. The sea—you told me you liked the sea one day,”—and he
      went on squeezing the paints on to his palette.
“I suppose so.” She said no more.
Hamlin was seated before his easel, looking now at his work and now at her, and making
      minute alterations with a small brush. They did not talk much. He seemed bent upon his work.
      He had told her that she need not keep her head in position, as he was merely finishing some
      unimportant details. Her eyes wandered round the room—at the books, the sketches on the wall,
      the rugs under foot. On the chimney‐piece was stuck a photograph of Melton Perry. If only she
      might have a photograph
       of Hamlin! . . . For less than a second she thought she
      might beg for one; then it seemed to her impossible, and the wish beat itself painfully
      against that cold, dead impossibility, like a bird against its cage‐bars.
Hamlin called the old woman—
“Take that letter to the post‐office at the Uffizi,” he said, pointing to his writing‐table,
      “and mind you get it registered.”
It was the first time that Hamlin had sent the old woman on an errand during one of Anne
      Brown’s sittings, when she was wont to go in and out of the studio noiselessly, like a
      watchful duenna.
The heavy stairs door banged behind her. Anne listened to it dully, vacantly, as one listens
      to things when deeply preoccupied. For a few minutes Hamlin worked on in silence, then
      suddenly, without looking up, he said—
“Do you remember my finding your ‘Dante’ in the vineyard at the Villa Arnolfini, Miss
      Brown?”
“Yes,” she answered.
“And you told me that you wished to fit yourself to be a teacher?”
“Yes, I remember.”
“Well,” went on Hamlin, “I have been thinking about that; and I think it would be a pity—I
      mean—I hope you won’t think it horribly rude of me to say so—I think it would be better if you
      went to school for a little while yourself.”
Anne stared at this speech, and at the close of it her surprise turned to resentment.
“Of course it would be better,” she said, bitterly; “of course I shall always be very
      ignorant; but I have no wish to set up for what I am not. I am not going to teach people
      anything—only to correct their pronunciation and a few mistakes. One does not require to study
      much for that, and I shall be competent to do it.”
In her quiet, subdued way she looked very angry.
Hamlin rose from his easel.
“You misunderstand me,” he said; “and
       indeed what I have to say is so strange and perhaps so
      unjustifiable, that you have every right to do so. Listen,” and he drew a chair near hers.
“Please do not think me very bold, and forgive the horrid way in which I am forced to put
      things, when I tell you, dear Miss Brown, that I am very much interested in you, and,
      indeed—will you forgive a comparative stranger saying so?—that I have never felt so much
      attracted by any one as I do by you.”
Anne Brown did not answer; she seemed literally petrified by sheer astonishment.
“The time has come when our acquaintance must come to an end,” went on Hamlin, rapidly; “but
      I cannot let this happen without making an effort to prolong it. I have no brothers or
      sisters—no one, at least, living with me, except distant relations. I have never taken much
      interest in anybody. But now I want to know—would you, instead of our parting company
      altogether—would you let me become
       your guardian for the next few years, and as such, would
      you let me take charge of your education and send you to school? It seems a very ridiculous
      thing to suggest. But still you must not be angry with me for doing so.”
Anne’s big onyx eyes had opened wider and wider. She flushed purple in the middle of his
      speech, then turned ashy‐white, while she picked convulsively at the fringe of the armchair.
      Then suddenly a sort of convulsion came across her face, and, as if from sheer unbearable
      tension of feeling, she burst into tears.
She gave way only one second, immediately trying to stop herself, but in vain. Hamlin felt
      that he was making a horrible mess of it. He came close up to the chair where the poor girl
      was thrown back, shaken with sobs.
“Miss Brown,” he cried, taking her hand—“Anne—oh, don’t be unhappy! I did not mean to offend
      you. Don’t you understand my meaning? I wish you to be what you have a right to be. I wish you
      to be in
       such a position that of all the men in the world you may
      choose the one who deserves you most. Anne, I love you—and I hope that perhaps some day you
      may love me; but I want you to be able to love whoever may best deserve you, and merely to do
      my best that you should care for me. I want you to have a future independent of me—to possess
      the education and the fortune which shall enable you to marry whomsoever you will, or not to
      marry at all. Will you let me, for the time being, be your guardian, your father, your
      brother; let me provide for you, take care of your money, see to your education? I do not ask
      you to love me, but merely to give me a chance of trying to make you prefer me.”
Anne did not cease sobbing; and every convulsive heaving of her body made Hamlin feel a sort
      of sickening terror. He slid down on his knees and kissed her hand.
This action seemed suddenly to awaken her. She started up, and making a tremendous effort,
      stopped her crying.
He stood aside while she went to the mirror and looked at her swollen eyes and convulsed
      face.
“May I have a glass of water?” she asked; then, stopping Hamlin, “never mind,” she
      said—“never mind—I must go;” and she pulled her blue veil hurriedly over her eyes and huddled
      on her cloak.
“Miss Brown,” cried Hamlin, “why don’t you answer me?” and he laid hold of her arm as she
      was about to open the door.
“Because you do not deserve it,” she answered, trying to loosen his grasp. “Let me go,
      please.”
“I cannot let you go,” answered Hamlin calmly, standing before the door, “until you have
      listened to me. Will you let me provide for your future, send you to school, and then place
      you in the care of my aunt? Will you let me act as if I were your guardian for the next three
      years, and at the end of them you shall have enough to live and marry as befits a lady, and be
      as free as air, or become my
       wife—whichever you shall choose? Answer me, for I am
      serious.”
Anne Brown paused.
“Don’t ask me for an answer now,” she said; “I am not sure that you are in earnest.”
“I am—indeed I am!” cried Hamlin; “I have intended asking you this ever since my return to
      Florence. I returned merely in order to ask you. I am in earnest; cannot you give me a serious
      answer?”
“Not now—I can’t think about anything; I must ask; I don’t know what is right to do.”
He opened the door, and Anne Brown walked out rapidly, through the anteroom and
      downstairs.
FOR a long time Anne Brown remained as it were dazed, as if she had received a blow
      on the head. When she got back to the Perrys’ house, she felt broken in all her limbs, and
      slipped up‐stairs and threw herself on her bed. But it was no use: all that day, while
      attending on the children and doing her usual work, she felt as if some one else were doing it
      all; while she remained conscious only of something very sudden and strange, of a confused
      buzzing in her brain, through which she heard the voice of Hamlin repeating his words in the
      studio; words which somehow made her indignant, angry, and at the same time filled her with a
      sense of having done something which she should not. This feeling increased
       at night, and she lay awake while the clocks struck hour
      after hour, hot, red, half deafened by her own blood, fevered and vaguely indignant. It was as
      if Hamlin had struck her; she felt insulted, outraged, by this strange interference with her
      fate, this wonderful intrusion of excitement into her dull and sombre life. It was dawn when
      she awoke: a chill greyness in the sky, reddened by the pale winter sun. She knew that
      something had happened, that something was changed. She was almost surprised to find herself
      in her usual room, with the children’s tea‐sets on the chest of drawers, the coloured pictures
      from the ‘Illustrated’ and the ‘Graphic’ pinned on the walls, the dolls’ houses in the corner,
      and little May asleep by her side in her crib. Then she remembered it all, and sat up in her
      bed thinking about it. Things appeared to her in quite a new light. She had been an ungrateful
      beast to feel as she had towards Hamlin; and a great wave of gratitude and awe, and love and
      joy, welled up in her heart. It was as if she were sitting
       in the sunshine: an indefinable kind of happiness. How
      noble and generous and good he had been; and how doubly so, being so great, and she being a
      mere nothing in the world! Whether he loved her or she him, she did not ask herself; it seemed
      a thing to die of for sheer happiness, that any one should care for her and her future. And
      just in proportion to her usual pride, and sullenness, and joylessness, she felt happy in the
      idea of deserving nothing and receiving everything, from his kindness: and Hamlin, with whom
      she had spoken not twenty‐four hours earlier, whom she would see again that day, appeared to
      her as a distant, dim, ineffable creature, lighting and warming her like the sun, but equally
      unapproachable. But on thinking it over, things came round to commonplace actuality. What was
      she to do? Would he ask her again? or even, had he asked her at all? It all seemed a dream,
      and she did not venture to examine into its reality. She determined to tell it all to Perry,
      and ask his advice; but she felt as
       if she never could. She met Perry several times in the
      course of the morning, but she could not succeed in screwing up her courage. What if it should
      all prove to be an illusion? She took the children out for their accustomed walk, during which
      she was even more silent than usual. On returning home she saw Hamlin in the street, close to
      the door. The blood all rushed up to her head. Hamlin saluted her as if nothing had happened,
      and accompanied her up‐stairs. When they were at the landing he suddenly turned to her—
“Have you thought over our conversation in the studio yesterday, Miss Brown?” he asked.
“Yes,” answered Anne, inaudibly, as he stood with his hand on the bell; “I have.”
“Well, then,” went on Hamlin, “with regard to the plan which I submitted to you, what is
      your answer? Do you consent or not?”
Anne Brown raised her head.
“I consent,” she answered quietly, looking
       full at him, as if to make sure that she was not talking in
      a dream. He had never seen her so beautiful and majestic before; and she had a look—with
      dilated eyes, and rapid, oppressed breath—like the one which he had noticed once when she
      talked of her father, and of which he had felt at once, “this is what I want.”
“Thank you,” he answered gravely, and rang the bell. For a moment they stood in silence,
      till the door was opened.
HAMLIN sat for some time in the dusty attic called a studio, while Perry cut
      acrobats and devils out of black paper, and stuck them on the dirty window‐panes.
“That’s my vocation,” said Perry, “and not painting damned landscape spinach and soapsud
      seas. Look! aren’t they jolly old fiends?” and he held up a group of black clowns, standing on
      each other’s hands and shoulders.
“Capital!” answered Hamlin. “But look here; I came to tell you something. I want the address
      of Miss Brown’s guardian,—you told me there was one,—because I am going to have Miss Brown
      educated, with a view, if she do not change her mind, to her becoming my wife.”
Perry let his scissors fall on the floor.
“Damnation!” he cried.
Hamlin picked up the scissors and put them quietly on the table.
“So that’s it!” burst out Perry. “While I was bothering my brains with trying to take care
      of Anne, you were being inveigled by that cursed hypocritical slut.”
“I shall be obliged to you to speak in rather different language, Perry,” said Hamlin, in a
      tone of voice and with a manner which his friend was not accustomed to.
“Oh, beast! brute! seven‐times‐distilled and most‐kickable jackass that I have been,” moaned
      Perry, “that I should have let this happen to you!—that I should have let you be entrapped
      under my very nose! But it mustn’t be, old fellow; I won’t stand it.”
“You will have to,” answered Hamlin, contemptuously; “and so, let’s say no more about it.
      Only one word: Miss Brown has not inveigled me.”
Perry gave a sort of moan of disgust. “No woman ever does inveigle a man!”
“Miss Brown has not inveigled me. I conceived the desire of educating her, and giving myself
      a chance of marrying her if she would have me, long ago, before I returned to Florence. And,
      as a favour, I beg you will respect Miss Brown so long as she remains in your house, as you
      would respect the woman who is at present my ward, and may possibly become my wife.”
“Ward! wife! fiddlesticks!” cried Perry. “For God’s sake, my dearest old Watty, don’t go and
      do such a damnable thing! don’t be such an idiot as to suppose you must do it. That was my
      confounded folly: let myself be led on, and then thought it was my own choice, my resolution,
      all sorts of fine things. No man ever really wants to tie himself up; it’s the woman who does
      it, and makes him believe it’s himself. All this is bosh, mere bosh; you’ll think better of
      it.”
“I tell you again, Perry, that there is no inveigling about the matter. I made up my mind to
      this step while I was away from
       Florence. Besides, I am not going to marry Miss Brown
      straight off; I am going to give her the education which such a woman deserves, to enable her
      to marry me should she care to do so.”
“Education, forsooth!” groaned Perry; “you will get yourself married before you have time to
      say Jack Robinson: and to think that I have brought it all upon you! to think that I have
      driven you to do it!”
Hamlin could not help smiling at his friend’s distress.
“Really, you need not feel under any responsibility. I alone am responsible in the
      business—I and good fortune, which has brought me into the presence of the most marvelIous
      woman that ever was—”
“But what do you do it for? You’re not in love with Annie, I do believe,” cried poor
      Perry.
“I do it because she is the most beautiful woman I have ever seen,” answered Hamlin,
      deliberately; “and the woman who, properly
       educated, is of all others the one whom I should most wish
      to love—because, in short, I cannot see her wasted.”
Perry flung his arms over his head with a gesture of grotesque despair. At that moment the
      door opened, and Mrs Perry entered the studio.
“What is the matter? what has happened?” she asked with a dramatic gesture, and a not less
      dramatic accent; and she remained standing on the threshold, raising the door‐curtain with
      much dignity.
“Hamlin wants to bring up and marry Anne Brown,” yelled Perry.
Mrs Perry tottered, let the curtain go, held her hand to her head for a moment.
“Anne Brown—do you hear that? He wants to marry her! to educate her! He has already
      proposed!” repeated Perry.
Mrs Perry came forward solemnly, and stretched out her hand to Hamlin.
“Dear friend,” she said softly, “my heart told me that this would be.”
“Fudge!” exclaimed Perry; “if it did, why the deuce didn’t you interfere?”
“My heart told me this would be. I congratulate you, dearest friend, that you have at last
      found the embodiment of your mysterious dreams of beauty. And I thank you, on my part, for
      giving me the happiness of seeing that glorious dethroned goddess reinstated in her rights,
      and also,”—and Mrs Perry’s long mouth smiled—formidable like an alligator’s,—“for giving me
      the happiness of witnessing a union of mystic perfection;” whereupon, to Hamlin’s horror, the
      tall and bony lady deposited a damp kiss on his forehead.
“Oh—but—thank you so much!” exclaimed Hamlin—“I have not asked Miss Brown to marry me; I
      have only asked her to let me educate her. I wish her to choose whatever husband may deserve
      her.”
“And that will be yourself—your noble, darling self,” beamed Mrs Perry.
“I am happy that you approve of my decision,” said Hamlin, quickly; “and since you
       do, will you kindly tell me the address of Miss
      Brown’s—Miss Brown’s guardian?”
“Julia, I forbid you,” moaned Perry feebly.
“His address”—answered Mrs Perry blandly, and taking no notice of her husband—“is Richard
      Brown, care of Gillespie Brothers, New Cross. He is foreman at a cannon‐foundry, or a place
      where they make torpedoes. I know it’s something murderous and dreadful.”
“Richard Brown, Gillespie Brothers, New Cross,” wrote Hamlin in his note‐book. “Thank you so
      much; I shall write to him at once.”
“Oh, idiotic beast that I was!” groaned Perry, “to think that it should all be my
      fault.”
“Come into my boudoir,” said Mrs Perry; “you shall write to him without a moment’s delay.
      Denrest Mr Hamlin, it is so noble, so lovely on your part; and dear Anne—how beautiful she
      will become!”
Perry paced up and down the room in violent despair, kicking at all the chairs and easels on
      his way, and hurling a tin of black
       paint against the ceiling, whence, having deposited its
      oozy contents, it slowly descended. After this, feeling that his despair was not yet vented,
      he stalked off to the German beer‐cellar, in the Via Lambertesca, and gloomily consumed a
       bock—a proceeding to which he invariably resorted whenever
      his wife had inspired him with a more than usually strong wish to drown himself.
Suddenly an idea struck him, and he rushed to the nearest telegraph‐office. There he spent
      upwards of an hour, and consumed many pieces of paper in concocting a missive which should,
      within the compass of twenty words, convey to Mr Richard Brown, care of Gillespie Brothers,
      New Cross, that the proposal being made to Anne Brown by a certain person must be immediately
      rejected, as its acceptance would bring ruin, dishonour, and misery on all parties. “Proposal
      disastrous snare,” wound up Perry at last in triumph; and then discovered that, in his zeal
      for Hamlin’s good,
       he had expressed disapprobation to the extent of exactly
      twenty francs of Italian money.
“Nothing but pipes—loathsome, smelly, filthy pipes; never a cigar—for the next two months,”
      meditated Perry, as he paid his money and received the clerk’s receipt; “but a fellow must
      save his friend after all.”
NO arrangements could be come to until Hamlin should hear from Anne Brown’s
      guardian, and this, even by return of post, was impossible under a week. And during that week,
      Hamlin determined to keep away from the Perrys’ house: the objurgations of Melton Perry, the
      congratulations of his wife, the very tittering of the children, all this vulgar prose had
      best be kept aloof from his romance; besides, he was in the ridiculous position that Anne was,
      and was not his; that she could no longer be considered the Perrys’ servant, and could not yet
      be considered as his ward. Accordingly, he betook himself for three days to Siena, deeming it
      impossible that any answer could come so soon.
But when Hamlin returned to his lodging in Florence, on the fourth day after his proposal to
      Anne Brown—it seemed to him as if he had proposed to her months ago, nay, as if he had never
      existed at all before that proposal—he was told that a gentleman had called that morning, and
      had left word that he would return again later on in the day.
“Some confounded painter or poetaster of my acquaintance,” thought Hamlin, annoyed that any
      one should call upon him at this point of his adventure.
A little later a card was brought in to him. The name upon it made him start—a large
      shopman’s card, on which was printed, “Richard Brown, New Cross.”
“Ask him to come in,” cried Hamlin.
The visitor stalked in: a tall, burly man, with bushy black hair and beard.
“An insolent cad,” said Hamlin to himself.
“Mr Walter Hamlin?” asked the newcomer, bowing very slightly, and looking down upon Hamlin
      from his big, bent shoulders.
“Precisely—and you, I believe, are Miss Anne Brown’s cousin?” answered Hamlin, stiffening at
      the other’s free‐and‐easy manner. The very look of this man rubbed him the wrong way. “Pray,
      sit down,” he added, doing his best to be courteous. But the other had already sat down.
“I have come here,” said Richard Brown, in a deep, Scotch voice, which made a certain
      abruptness of manner even more offensive to his host, “in consequence of a telegram which I
      received from your friend Mr Melton Perry.”
Hamlin turned pale with anger.
“Perry telegraphed behind my back,” he exclaimed—“however, I had written to you the same
      day. I presume you know the contents of my letter?”
“I have received no letter from you—I suppose I started before it arrived,” answered Richard
      Brown. “Mr Perry mentioned no letter from you in his telegram, and as I understood from it
      that there were plans afoot which concerned my cousin and ward, I
       thought I had best come at once and inquire into them.”
He stopped a moment, and looked Hamlin in the face, as if to find out what sort of man he
      might be. He himself might be any age between thirty and forty, of the darkest possible Scotch
      type, sun‐burnt like a bargee, snub of feature, with a huge, overhanging forehead; he was a
      man such as Hamlin had never dealt with—a type which he recognised as having seen among
      workmen and Dissenting preachers: ugly, intellectual, contemptuous—the incarnation of what, to
      the descendants of Cavaliers and Jamaica planters, seemed the aggressive lower classes.
“I see,” said Hamlin, coldly. “I am greatly obliged to you for the trouble you have taken.
      Your presence here will make it much easier for us to settle all necessary matters.”
“Mr Perry,” went on the visitor, “has given me rather a confused account of the proposal
      which I understand you to have made to my cousin; and I thought it wiser to see
       you before speaking to her. I must therefore beg you to
      tell me whether Mr Perry’s account of your proposal is correct, and also whether you are in
      earnest in making it.”
“Had you waited for my letter, I think you could have had no further doubts,” answered
      Hamlin, with some irritation. “To recapitulate, then. I proposed to Miss Brown that she should
      permit me to take charge of her education for the next two years, and, on her becoming of age
      and deeming her studies complete, to place at her disposal the capital of an income which
      should enable her to live in a manner corresponding with the education she had received, and
      to make a suitable marriage.”
While Hamlin was speaking a sneer came over his listener’s face.
“I am to understand, therefore,” he said, “that I was misinformed as to this being a
      proposal of marriage.”
“Pardon me,” corrected Hamlin, gently. “I told your cousin that I hoped that perhaps, at the
      end of those two years, or more, she might
       feel inclined to accept me as her husband; but that my
      particular object was that Miss Brown should, on coming of age, find herself in possession of
      a fortune corresponding to her education, and which should leave her free to contract whatever
      marriage she pleased, or to continue single.”
Richard Brown flushed.
“In short,” he said, with a strange irony in his voice, “you offer to provide my cousin with
      a competence whereon to live, or get married, after she shall have remained for two years in
      your charge. I fully appreciate the intention of your proposal; and I therefore beg to refuse
      it.”
The blood rushed to Hamlin’s head. That such an interpretation should be put upon his words
      had never entered his mind. It was as if a whip had whizzed about his ears and cut into his
      face. His first impulse was to knock the other down. But the sense of his misunderstood
      superiority, superiority unintelligible to his visitor, restrained him.
“I quite understand your refusal, Mr Brown,” he answered, “as a result of your
      interpretation of the case; and I suppose I have no right to ask you to see my proposal,
      except as you would mean it were you to make it yourself.”
Richard Brown turned pale; but he too mastered his feelings.
“If your intention is to marry my cousin, why not marry her at once?” he asked, with
      something in his look which expressed that he felt himself not to be outwitted by a vicious
      fool.
Hamlin hesitated. He felt that he could never make this man understand his dreams, his plans
      of turning Anne Brown into a realised ideal, of wooing and winning the creature of his own
      making.
“Because—because,” he hesitated.
“Because,” interrupted Richard Brown, “a man in your position of life cannot marry a girl
      like my cousin before she has been turned into a lady; and because, even if this be granted,
      he cannot bind himself to marry her
       until he see whether schooling has succeeded in making a
      lady of her. I perfectly follow your reasons; but you also can follow mine when I say that my
      cousin cannot be subjected to the ups and downs of your appreciation.”
In this man there was a hatred of Hamlin, not merely as a fine gentleman, an idler, but as
      an æsthete; a hatred not merely of class, but of temperament.
“You misunderstand my motives,” answered Hamlin, losing patience. “My reason for not
      marrying your cousin at once is, that I would not marry a woman who cannot possibly love me as
      yet; and my reason against a formal engagement between us is, that I cannot consent to bind
      Miss Brown to marry me when she has no opportunity as yet of choosing a man more to her taste.
      It seems to me,” added Hamlin, feeling the advantage on his side, “that to take your cousin in
      marriage now, or to bind her to marry me in the future, would be buying her in exchange for
      the education and the money which she will receive
       from me. That education and that money are intended to
      secure her freedom, to secure her choice of a man whom she may love, not to make her into the
      chattel of a man whom she could only despise.”
Hamlin’s tone and these sentiments, which seemed to belong to a world west of the sun and
      east of the moon, evidently impressed Anne’s guardian. He remained silent for a moment, unable
      to realise Hamlin’s state of mind, while no longer able to disbelieve in it. But the
      temptation to disbelieve in the sincerity of this handsome, effeminate, æsthetic aristocrat
      was too strong.
“All this is very noble and chivalric,” he said, “and I doubt not quite natural in a poet
      like you, Mr Hamlin; but for us practical people, I fear it won’t do. I am fully persuaded of
      the desirability of giving my cousin some further schooling, and fully persuaded also of the
      undesirability of leaving her any longer in the care of Mr Perry. So I shall take her back to
      England with me.”
Hamlin turned pale with anger. It sickened him to see his plans dragged in the mire of this
      fellow’s suspicions, and at the same time he felt unable ever to make him understand, utterly
      helpless in defending himself. Suddenly an idea struck him.
“I see,” said Hamlin, rising and leaning against the fireplace, while his guest remained
      coolly seated—“I see that, in plain words, you suppose that I project settling some money upon
      your cousin, with a view of making her my mistress for two years—that is it, is it not, Mr
      Brown?”
The brutal frankness staggered Brown; it was impossible to make any more insinuations now.
      And he began to feel ashamed of those which he had already made. His own imagination, then,
      was less clean than the intentions of this womanish fine gentleman?
Perhaps for this very reason he answered calmly, but turning very red—
“Yes, sir; that is exactly the state of the case.”
Hamlin felt a sort of triumph at this humiliation of his visitor.
“In that case,” he said, “I think I can devise a plan which shall satisfy you—which will
      relieve your apprehensiveness. I offer not merely to settle upon Miss Brown the capital of
      five hundred a‐year, to be administered by you until her majority; but also to give you my
      word of honour to marry Miss Brown at any time that she may summon me to do so.”
Richard Brown was taken aback; all this romance, which he had believed to be but a vicious
      snare, was then real.
“I don’t understand you,” he said. “I don’t understand what you want to do with my
      cousin.”
“It seems difficult to explain it to you, Mr Brown,” said Hamlin; “still, I may repeat it. I
      wish Miss Brown to receive all the advantages of education and money which a woman gifted like
      her has a right to, and which will enable her to freely marry a man worthy of her—
       myself, or any other in the world. I will not hear of
      binding Miss Brown to me at present, either by marriage or by promise of marriage; she is to
      remain absolutely independent. But I offer once more to pledge myself to marry her whenever
      she may wish it.”
Brown did not answer for a moment.
“Are you ready to sign a document to that effect?” he asked.
“I will give Miss Brown my word,” answered Hamlin, contemptuously; “and I will give you, Mr
      Brown, as many signed documents as may be equivalent thereto in your eyes.”
Brown felt the insult, but he knew he had drawn it upon himself. For a moment he hesitated;
      his aversion to Hamlin and Hamlin’s plan fighting painfully with his sense of the worldly
      interests of his ward. At last he said—
“On these conditions I can no longer make any opposition; and it rests with my cousin to
      accept or refuse your offer. I can only warn her and you—and to do so is my
       duty, I think—that, in my opinion, such an arrangement is
      utterly undesirable for both parties, and that my strong advice is not to enter upon it.”
“I take your warning to heart,” answered Hamlin, contemptuously; “but I cannot agree with
      it. May I beg you to meet me at the English Consulate to‐morrow morning, to witness the
      document which you proposed I should draw out; the matter of her money settlement I shall
      leave in the hands of my lawyers. What hour will suit you? and may I have the pleasure of
      receiving you to breakfast with me and Mr Perry, who will doubtless be my witness?”
Richard Brown bowed.
“Thank you,” he said briefly; “I think I should prefer breakfasting at my inn. With regard
      to the document, I shall be happy to meet you at the Consulate any time convenient to
      yourself. But,” and his face became as threatening as his voice was studiously courteous, “we
      must first hear whether, on
       second thoughts, my cousin accepts your proposal. Good
      afternoon, Mr Hamlin.”
“Good afternoon,” answered Hamlin.
Richard Brown’s visit had left a nauseous taste in his soul.
LATER in the afternoon Richard Brown called at the Perrys’ and asked to see his
      cousin. He was received with effusiveness by Mrs Perry.
“So you have seen our noble, darling Hamlin,” she cried; “and you have felt your heart go
      out to meet him as we have felt ours.”
“I have seen Mr Hamlin,” answered Brown roughly, not at all appreciating the lady’s winning
      manners; “and I should like to speak to my cousin, please.”
“Anne—my beautiful Anne”—cried Mrs Perry, opening the door of the next room.
“Poor child!” she added, “how she has been trembling in her heart all day!”
Anne entered. She was paler even than
       usual, and was more than usually self‐possessed. She had
      seen her guardian for a minute early that morning, and she knew that this visit would seal her
      fate.
“Good afternoon, Richard,” she said briefly.
Brown looked round at Mrs Perry, waiting for her to withdraw. But such was by no means her
      intention.
“Don’t be unhappy, darling,” she said to Anne; “I know how one woman always longs for
      another woman in these moments. I will stay with you while your cousin tells you the result of
      his visit.”
“It is very kind of you, madam,” said Brown gruffly, “but I think this matter had better be
      settled solely between my cousin and myself. Would you permit her to take me into some other
      room?”
“Oh, I don’t wish to intrude,” sighed Mrs Perry, “I only wished to support this poor child
      with my presence. But after all, a woman who loves requires support from no one.” Saying which
      she swept out of the room.
There was a moment’s silence.
“I have been to Mr Hamlin’s, Anne,” said Brown briefly, seating himself by the fire.
“Well?”
The tone of voice was so resolute and even triumphant that he raised his head and looked up
      at her where she was standing by the table, a piece of needlework still in her hands.
“Well,” answered Brown quietly, and watching the effect of each of his words on the pale,
      melancholy, but dispassionate face of the girl, “I have spoken to Mr Hamlin; and I find that
      you were correct in your judgment, and that I was mistaken in mine. He is in earnest in his
      proposal, and honest in it.”
“I knew that;” and Anne Brown wondered whether this could be the same cousin Dick who was a
      big boy, almost a man, when she was a tiny mite at Spezia; who took care of her when her
      mother was ill and her father was drunk; who used to shoulder his uncle and drag him off to
      bed when, in a fit of
       intoxication, he would come in and threaten to throw the
      babies out of the window. She recognised the small features, the dark skin and hair, the heavy
      intellectual brow; but he seemed to have changed in expression, to have grown hard, and
      arrogant, and coarse.
“I knew that,” she repeated, “though you would not believe it. So,” she added, with a
      certain hardness in her manner, “I suppose I am left free to decide, and that you are ready to
      let Mr Hamlin do what he chooses.”
“You are free to decide,” he answered. “Mr Hamlin, as I have said, is serious and honest,
      and willing to make every provision which can bind him and leave you free, legally. I cannot,
      as your guardian, say no. But,” and his voice assumed a threatening tone, “as your kinsman,
      and as the representative of your father, I most earnestly dissuade you from accepting this
      proposal.”
Anne reddened. “But you can no longer oppose it,” she said quickly.
“I have told you before that you are free,
       Anne. And because you are free,” continued Brown, a sort of
      despair coming over him at the sight of the girl’s indifference—“because you are free, I want
      you to listen to me. This proposal is one which, in the eyes of the world, will change your
      life for the better: you will be educated, get the manners of a lady, be rich yourself, and
      marry a rich man. But will you stand higher in your own opinion? Would you stand as high as
      you should in that of your father, if he were alive? You, having bartered your freedom, having
      accepted all from this one man?”
Anne did not answer.
“Of course,” went on Richard Brown eagerly, “you will have every worldly advantage. But will
      you be happy taken out of your own sphere of life, knowing yourself to be bound in gratitude
      to this man, who will always continue to feel your superior, to look down upon you as a beggar
      whom he has fed, or a chattel which he has bought? This man is, for his class and ideas,
      honourable: he wishes to leave you free
       to marry him only if you please; he wishes to marry you
      really and truly. But in reality he is making you his slave; for how can you refuse him the
      only thing which you, my poor Nan, can give him in return for his money? And in reality he is
      making you his mistress; for what sort of marriage is it which is a marriage merely before the
      world—where the one buys and the other is bought?”
Anne flushed still deeper, and trembled from head to foot as she leaned against the table. A
      dull pain clawed her at the heart, a lump rose up to her throat. But she did not speak.
Richard Brown misunderstood her silence. He rose and approached the table, and tried to put
      his arm paternally on her shoulder. She shrank back, but let his heavy hand rest on her
      shoulder. What did his touch matter when there were his words?
“Annie, dear,” said Brown more gently, “you know I am a rough man, and don’t know how to
      mince matters and say things to women; but you know that I am fond of
       you. Don’t you recollect when you were a wee lassie, and I
      used to carry you about on my back, and go into the water to get you the sea‐weeds and the
      little nautiluses. I suppose you don’t any longer. But still, you know I would not for the
      world hurt my poor little Nan.”
Anne held on to the table, and as she recognised that familiar intonation, hot tears rolled
      down her cheeks. Her whole childhood seemed to return to her.
“Don’t cry—don’t cry!” exclaimed Brown, taking her hand. “Poor child! I know it must be very
      hard for you who are so young; I know what it must be to be tempted with a lady’s education,
      and money, and a fine gentleman, who’s in love with one, for a husband. But remember what your
      poor dad used to tell us, that we common folk must make our own way—make the others feel that
      we’re as good as they, and not accept anything from them. D’you remember how he used to say to
      me, ‘Work and be proud’? Well, and I
       have worked and have been proud, and it’s that that has
      enabled me to rest a little. And you, too, must be proud, and work, my little Annie.”
“Look here,” he went on, “you must not think you are never to be anything but a servant. I
      feel I’ve been to blame, and neglected you too long. You see, I’ve had to work hard for my
      life, out in England; but now I am quite safely off—indeed much better off than I ever
      anticipated: my employer is going to take me into partnership next year. Well, since you wish
      to go to school, I will send you there. You shall come back with me to England, and I will
      send you to the very best school to be found: you shall be as good as any lady, and you shall
      owe nothing to any one. Annie, do say yes.”
He spoke, this rough man, almost as one might to a sick child; and as he spoke, he tried to
      pass his arm round the girl’s waist. But Anne shuddered, and freed herself from his grasp.
      There was something in this big dark
       man, with his bushy hair and beard, which made her shrink
      physically, although she felt no suspicion of him morally. The thought of Hamlin passed across
      her mind—Hamlin, who was everything which Richard Brown was not.
“You are very good, Dick,” she said, feeling ashamed of her ingratitude; “but—but—oh no, no,
      I can’t, I can’t!” and she hid her tears with her hands.
“Can’t what?” exclaimed Brown, and his voice and face changed; “can’t what? Can’t accept my
      offer; can’t owe anything to me, to your cousin, to the man to whom your father confided you?
      No! you won’t be under such an obligation, eh? Nay, don’t humbug me. You can’t give up the
      money, the land, the house, the fine name—all the things which he can give you and I can’t;
      for I can only give you an education, and I was such a fool as to think that you wanted that!”
      and Brown laughed a loud, bitter laugh.
“You want to marry that man,” he went
       on brutally; “well, do so. But remember what marriage
      means. You are a girl of the people, who has had to take care of herself—not a fine young
      lady, as yet, thank God, with all the fine names which fine folk have for nasty things. You
      know what marriage means. It means being a man’s chattel, more than his beast of burden, his
      plaything, the toy of his caprice and sensuality. It means, also, that you must smother all
      love for a worthier man, or degrade yourself in your own eyes. Will you be this, sell yourself
      thus—?”
“Mr Hamlin does not wish me to degrade myself,” cried the girl. “He respects me,—yes, he
      does; and you—you don’t!”
“He respects you!” sneered Brown. “And he does not want to degrade you. Of course, he’s a
      respectable, highly moral man. But, upon my soul, I would rather you had been seduced by a man
      you loved, than that you should have sold yourself coldly in this way.”
Anne felt herself choking. For a moment she could not utter a word. Then suddenly,
       with a strange look in her eyes, she cried, in a tone which
      smote her cousin on the mouth—
“I love him!”
Brown turned and looked her in the face. She was very flushed, and her slate‐grey eyes
      gleamed feverishly. But her face was calm, and she returned his taunting gaze, which sought
      for the proof that she lied, with a look of irrepressible contempt.
“I love him!” she repeated.
Brown took his hat.
“Good‐bye,” he said, stretching out his hand; “I left the choice in your hands, and you have
      chosen. To‐morrow morning I shall settle everything with Mr Hamlin—the papers, I mean—which
      shall make him henceforth your sole protector. Then I shall go. Goodbye. I wish you joy of
      your choice”—he paused—“you mercenary thing!”
Anne did not move.
Richard Brown had already turned the handle of the door when he stopped. “One thing more,”
      he said, “which I desire you
       to know. You have taken care of yourself hitherto, and you
      are prudent enough in all conscience, and world‐wise enough, and heartless enough, to do so in
      future; so this piece of information may be of use to you. To‐morrow he will sign a paper,
      which I shall keep till you come of age, declaring that, although he leaves you complete
      freedom in the choice of a husband, he binds himself to marry you whenever you may call upon
      him to do so. You will doubtless know how to turn this to profit. Good‐bye.”
Anne sank into a chair, excited, exhausted, all her blood in movement, she scarcely knew
      why—insulted, maligned, and yet with a great sense of joyfulness in her heart.
A MONTH later, the little Perrys were being taken for their walk in the Boboli
      Gardens by a Swiss bonne in a quilted cap; and Anne Brown
      was unpacking her things in a room overlooking the yellowish‐green Rhine, with its oscillating
      bridge of boats, and facing the rocks and bastions of Ehrenbreitstein.
When Richard Brown had returned to England with the signed documents in his pocket, Hamlin
      had immediately written two letters,—one to his lawyers, instructing them to settle the
      capital of five hundred a‐year, that is to say, one quarter of his property, on Anne Brown;
      the other, narrating the history of his engagement (if engagement it might be called), to the
      widow of his former tutor, and asking
       her to admit the young lady in whom he was interested into
      her school at Coblenz. It was the Easter holidays, and Mrs Simson had taken advantage of the
      fact to come to Florence in order to take back her pupil herself.
There was still a fortnight before the school would reopen, so Hamlin suggested that they
      should slowly travel north, and it was settled that he should accompany the schoolmistress and
      his ward. The greater part of that fortnight was spent at Venice, where Anne Brown had never
      been, and Hamlin parted company from them to return to England, only at Munich.
Mrs Simson was of that particular type of Englishwoman which, however much it may marry,
      always seems to remain an old maid; but an old maid whose old‐maidishness is an incapacity of
      feeling any difference of age between herself and her youngers, of maintaining any stateliness
      of superior age and experience: a hopeful, believing, shrewd, happy‐go‐lucky, enthusiastic
      creature, invariably making
       one think of a remarkably good‐natured old grey mare. Youth
      was the greatest attraction in the world to her, and she identified herself completely with
      the young women that came under her influence. Hamlin had known her in his boyish days, and
      lately, passing along the Rhine, had stayed with her for a day or two in her old‐fashioned
      house by the confluence of the Rhine and the Mosel. The impression that this school was so
      utterly unlike any of the girls’ schools he had read of in novels; the impression that a young
      woman might develop there into whatever pleasant thing nature intended,—had been so strong,
      that from the moment of his first contemplating a possible marriage with the Perrys’ servant,
      Mrs Simson and her school at Coblenz had formed an essential part of his plans. The lady, on
      the other hand, was exactly the kind of woman to whom a situation like this would appeal:
      Hamlin, whom she had entertained on buns and ginger‐beer, and then, in later years, raved over
      after the first sonnet which he sent to
       the ‘Athenæum,’ had always been her especial object of
      adoration; and his adoption of a beautiful and strange young woman, his preparation of a bride
      for himself, was for her the finishing touch to his perfection. She would indeed have
      preferred had Anne Brown been small and fair, and garrulous and impish, and shown a love for
      mathematics and flirtation; but, nevertheless, Anne Brown, inasmuch as she was the elect of
      Walter Hamlin, and inasmuch as she was a beautiful young creature, immediately won the facile
      but not fickle heart of Mrs Simson. The whole business seemed to her as natural as possible;
      and it was she who proposed that Hamlin should accompany her and his ward part of their way
      northwards.
What was Anne’s own condition? During those hours in the train, when Hamlin was for ever
      jumping out and overwhelming them with coffee and stale cakes and newspapers at every station;
      during those days at Venice, when they stayed at the same hotel (the headwaiter quite
      spontaneously wrote “Mrs Simson
       and niece” in the strangers’ book), and spent their days in
      picture‐galleries and churches and gondolas, and their evenings at theatres,—during all that
      journey Anne was as cold, and silent, and melancholy as she had been when first they had met
      at the Villa Arnolfini; indeed any man but Hamlin, and any woman except Mrs Simson, would
      probably have been disheartened and disgusted by this apparent stolidity of behaviour. But Mrs
      Simson had already made up her character of Anne Brown, and fallen in love with it quite
      independent of realities; and Hamlin was rather pleased that the creature whom he was going to
      teach how to think and how to feel, did not manifest any particular mode of thinking and
      feeling of her own. So they were both extremely assiduous to Anne Brown, and in reality
      thought much more about what she was going to be than about what she actually was.
The fact was that the poor girl was in a dazed condition—that all this journey seemed
       to her unreal, and all the things around her unsubstantial.
      Her head felt hollow, she seemed to be informed about her feelings rather than to experience
      them, her own words sounded as if through a whispering‐gallery. A couple of weeks ago she had
      had so strong a consciousness of identity and existence, of her own desires and hopes; now she
      could not well understand how she came to be where she was. Sometimes, while mechanically
      talking with her companions or walking in their company, she used to ask herself how it had
      all come about, and then she could see no reason for it all; it seemed accidental,
      inexplicable, causeless, and almost incredible. Whenever, on the other hand, she awakened to
      the reality of things, she was depressed by a sense of transition; she was afraid of speaking,
      and almost of feeling. As long as she had been the Perrys’ servant, she had experienced no
      shyness with Hamlin; as far as her taciturn nature would allow, she had spoken out whatever
      she had thought or
       felt, without considering whether or not it might surprise,
      annoy, or amuse him. Now, on the contrary, she gradually became conscious of a fear lest
      Hamlin should have cheated himself in choosing her. Unable to tell any one of this feeling,
      she let it overshadow her. One evening at Munich, two or three days before they parted company
      with Hamlin, Mrs Simson, coming into Anne’s room, found the girl seated with her head in the
      pillows of her bed, sobbing.
The excellent and somewhat romantic heart of the schoolmistress immediately melted at this
      sight.
“My dear child,” she cried, looking more than ever like a friendly grey old mare, “what is
      the matter with you?”
But Anne merely buried her head deeper in the pillows, and sobbed harder than before.
“What is the matter?” repeated Mrs Sireson, laying her hand on Anne’s shoulder.
“Oh, leave me, leave me!” moaned the girl.
Mrs Simpson gently passed her arm under
       the prostrate girl’s breast, and lifted her up from the
      bed.
“What is the matter with you, my dear?” she asked.
“Nothing—nothing,” sobbed Anne, trying to hide her cried‐out eyes with her hands.
“Nonsense; nothing!” said Mrs Simson, briskly. “You are unhappy about something, you poor
      little thing.”
Girls, and especially girls in distress, invariably appeared little to Mrs Simson, even
      when, like Anne Brown, they overtopped her by a good head.
“Something is the matter with you,” she insisted. “Now just let us see together what it may
      be;” and she made the reluctant girl sit down by her side on the sofa. “Are you homesick?—do
      you feel very strange, poor dearie, with strange people?— are you frightened a little by the
      sudden change in your life?—it’s very natural, my dear little girl, but you’ll get over it
      soon.”
Anne shook her head. But the impossibility
       of making Mrs Simson understand what depressed her, sent
      the sobs once more into her voice.
“No, no,” she said; “oh no, no—you can’t understand. I don’t feel lonely—I don’t feel
      unhappy—but it’s only because Mr Hamlin—”
“Because Mr Hamlin is going away, my dear?” Mrs Simson smiled as she kissed Anne on the
      crisp iron‐black hair, for the girl would not loosen her hands from her face—“Because he is
      going away? That’s very natural too; but it won’t be for long, dearest.”
Anne broke loose from her embrace. “It’s not that! it’s not that!” she sobbed; “please go
      away—you can’t understand—it’s not that! Oh no, I shall be glad when he be gone away!”
Mrs Simson rose. At first she felt pained, disgusted; but her frigidness melted with the
      speedy reflection that girls don’t know what the matter is with them in such cases.
“Good‐bye, dear,” she said; “I shall send you up some tea in a few minutes; that will set
      you all right. But don’t fret because
       Mr Hamlin is going. You will see him soon again.”
“I shall be glad when he is gone!” repeated Anne, in a paroxysm of grief.
It was not a mere foolish, hysterical falsehood. It was a real relief when, one morning at
      Frankfurt, Hamlin was standing on the platform of the station, speaking to them at the door of
      their carriage. The guard came to slam the door.
“Good‐bye, Mrs Simson,” said Hamlin. “Good‐bye, Miss Brown.”
“Good‐bye, sir,” she answered, extending her hand.
He kissed it hurriedly. The door was slammed. The train moved on slowly, and Hamlin walked
      along its side. Gradually it went quicker and quicker, and Anne Brown saw Hamlin for a minute
      on the platform; he was pale, but radiant. He waved his hand.
“A rivederci !” he cried, waving his hat.
A pillar of the station hid him. Anne turned away from the window and opened a
       book which he had given her. She read so assiduously all
      that day, that poor Mrs Simson, who was a sociable woman, resorted, in sheer despair, to
      talking with the other travellers, who stared in puzzled surprise at the tall girl with the
      melancholy pale face and masses of crimp black hair who sat opposite her.
When they had got out of the train, rattled over the round stones of Coblenz, and were
      finally following the obstreperously welcoming cook and housemaid up the stairs of Mrs
      Simson’s house, Anne felt relieved. And when she had been left alone in her room, she felt a
      weight off her. When she had taken some things out of her box, she went to the window. The
      last flare of sunset was on the marblelike brownish‐green swirls of the Rhine; and filaments
      of reddish gold streaked the sky above Ehrenbreitstein, whose windows gleamed crimson. A
      steamer was puffing and whistling by the wharf; the trumpets of the rappel shrieked through the streets and were reechoed from the opposite shore.
      From inside
       the house rose the sound of a piano; some one was playing
      Bach’s “Mein gläubiges Herz.”
It was the beginning of a new life. Anne Brown left the window, hung her clothes in the
      wardrobe, folded her linen in the drawers. Then she took from her trunk a framed photograph of
      Hamlin, and stuck it on her dressing‐table; he was very handsome, with his straight,
      keen‐featured, almost beardless Norman face and waves of light hair: she looked at it long.
      Then she dived to the bottom of her trunk and brought out two little books; the “Petrarch” he
      had given her at Lucca, and the volume of his own poems. She sat down by the open window and
      began reading them, and glancing at the redness dying away from river and sky. She felt very
      solemn and happy.
“I must become worthy of him,” she thought.
LIFE was monotonous enough at Mrs Simson’s at Coblenz; but it was a kind of
      monotony which to Anne Brown was positively exciting. It was for her a process of absorption
      into another class of life; and as such, represented a daily influx of new ideas and habits, a
      daily surprise, effort, and adjustment. By virtue of her half‐Italian nature, Anne required
      but little to make her, in education and manners, a lady. With her wide‐open but rather empty
      mind, her seriousness and dignity of person, extreme simpleness, as the reverse of complexity
      of character, it was wholly unnecessary that she should unlearn anything, or even that she
      should absorb anything absolutely new; the only thing was to fill up the magnificent design
       which already existed in her. No one ever required to say
      to Anne, “You must not do, or think, or say such or such a thing.” She surprised people only
      by her timidity, her silence, her passiveness, and by a sort of haughtiness which accompanied
      them strangely enough; a certain solemn, and, at the same time, abrupt way of judging of
      things and treating people, and which was the mental counterpart of her look, gait, nay, even
      of the folds which her dresses took on her. Ignorant though she was, she seemed at her ease
      with the new culture with which she was presented, just as, for all her habits of waiting on
      instead of being served, she seemed at ease in her behaviour. But it was difficult for Anne to
      tune herself or get herself tuned to the pitch of the everyday feelings and life of her
      companions; she could not understand these young ladies. The girls at Mrs Simson’s did not
      exceed half‐a‐dozen, and they were none of them schoolgirls in the ordinary sense. They were,
      like Anne, eccentrically placed young women; orphans, or girls
       whose parents were in the colonies, or girls who could not
      get on at home,—girls, all of them, with a certain pretension to superiority, and a great
      habit of independence, which was fostered by the schoolmistress, whose theory was that women
      could not possibly be left too much to their own devices.
Mrs Simson was very fond of preaching this gospel of higher education, to the great scandal
      of the respectable German matrons whom she visited. “Narrow‐minded, vicious creatures,” she
      used to say, who shook their heads at the young ladies attending public lectures, walking
      about by themselves, and flirting in the most stalwart and open manner (quite unsentimental
      and unwomanly, said the Germans) with the Prussian officers. Of these girls two were orphans,
      and had been sent to Coblenz as a convenient riddance by their guardians; one had been
      deposited in Europe by her parents, to be called for when educated, and shipped off to New
      Zealand; one, a huge damsel approaching thirty, was studying eye‐
       surgery with a famous Rhenish oculist; the fifth was going
      to Girton and was studying German; the sixth had found her home too much for her, and was
      perpetually complaining of the hardness of her fate and the viciousness of her own character,
      aspiring to impossible ideals of knowledge and usefulness and self‐sacrifice, and spending her
      leisure making up frocks in which to disport herself at the garrison balls.
Each of them studied whatsoever she thought fit: Greek and Latin professors, piano and
      singing masters, German governesses, were perpetually going in and out of the house; the girls
      were continually running to lectures on botany or physiology or comparative philology, where
      the youth of the town eyed the Schöne Engländerinnen with
      rapture, sending them anonymous bouquets and verses, and bringing them serenades, and even, to
      poor Mrs Simson’s horror, slipping love‐letters of the most burning description into the
      door‐hinges. Among these girls poor Anne would have felt utterly lost, had she not been
      accustomed for years to be
       her own sole company, letting her life brush by that of
      other folk, without ever mixing. It seemed to her quite natural to exchange one kind of
      isolation for another: to drudge on at improving her own mind as she had formerly drudged on
      at mending the clothes and making the beds of the little Perrys, interesting herself as little
      in, and awakening as little interest among, her companions as she had done among her
      fellow‐servants in Italy. Mrs Simson had received full instructions from Hamlin as to all the
      things which she was and was not to teach or have taught to his ward; and Anne would have been
      perfectly satisfied with working for her French and German masters, preparing her lessons of
      geography and history, and reading such books as Hamlin would send her, but the other girls
      were not at all so minded.
Anne Brown’s arrival created a tremendous sensation in Mrs Simson’s establishment. Her
      strange kind of beauty, which did not strike the conventional spectator as being beauty
       at all, excluding, as it did, fairness, rosiness,
      youthfulness, daintiness, liveliness, voluptuousness, sentimentalness, or any of the orthodox
      ingredients of female charm,—her wholly unlike‐everyone‐else appearance, her silence,
      sullenness, haughtiness, all took the girls by surprise. Her shyness, ignorance, newness in
      her position, was obvious from the very first day. The knowledge of what she had been and what
      she was going to be, all this romance was quickly wheedled out of Mrs Simson by the
      misunderstood little girl who wished to turn sister of mercy, and carried on a simultaneous
      flirtation with a lieutenant, a Bonn student, a painter, and a piano‐master; and bullied out
      of her by the bouncing amazon who talked about nothing but retinal impressions and optic
      nerves. From that moment Anne became a subject of intense interest at the school: most of the
      girls had heard of Hamlin in England, and all of them had heard of him from the enthusiastic
      schoolmistress. To possess in their midst his chosen one was a great privilege,
       although they sometimes made fun of Anne and him behind her
      back, drawing pictures of the solemn and tragic girl dressed in the most draggled æsthetic
      manner, surrounded by a circle of young æsthetes copied out of ‘Punch’ (Bunthome did not exist
      at that time) holding lilies and swinging censers as she went. They all thought Anne a
      strange, awe‐inspiring, and, at the same time, somewhat ridiculous person; but they all got to
      like her, although the misunderstood High Church flirt could never be got to see why Anne
      should despise officers and garrison balls; and the scientific girl of twenty‐eight thought
      æstheticism and æsthetic poets idiotic and immoral; and each of the others found some
      reservation to make about the Italian, as they called her. Yet, as I said, they did grow to
      like her; and Anne, who was unaccustomed to friendliness, was so touched by the familiarity
      and good‐nature of her companions, that she gradually began to take a great and serious
      interest in their concerns. She became quite enthusiastic about ocular
       surgery, listening with scarcely any shudders to the
      narration of the most complicated operations; she let herself be overwhelmed with discourses
      about Middle High German and Gothic, and the connection with Sanskrit; she firmly believed in
      the mystical fervours, the desire of self‐sacrifice, the wasted passion of the little
      fair‐haired flirt, reasoning seriously about them, and trying to check what she believed to be
      a suicidal tendency; she was greatly touched by the home‐sickness and family squabbles of the
      other girls. Not that Anne was a fool, or made to be a dupe; on the contrary, she saw well
      enough the funniness of the contrasts between her friends’ words and their life; but Anne was
      so earnest, so simple, so homogeneous of nature, she was so fervent in all her feelings, that
      she always imagined that the serious things which people said or affected must be the reality;
      and, as in her own case, the levity, the frivolousness, the fickleness, must be the mere
      exterior clothing of social fictions. Thus she gave her sympathy wherever it was asked
       for, while asking for no sympathy herself. The girls used
      often to remark upon this, and complain that for all they did, Anne Brown remained surrounded
      by a sort of moral moat, alone, isolated, impregnable in a kind of moral fortress.
AS Hamlin had fancied, while painting Anne’s portrait, so the girls at Mrs Simson’s
      used to fancy that there could not be much going on inside this taciturn and undemonstrative
      creature. But it was not so. While Anne looked so quiet, said so little (and least of all
      about herself) during those two years of school, a drama—nay, a whole life‐poem—was
      incessantly going on within her. She worked indefatigably at her lessons, read every book she
      could lay hold of, was taken to concerts, lectures, burgher tea‐parties and garrison balls,
      and on excursions up and down the Rhine and into the neighbouring hills; but all this was but
      as an exterior life surrounding an interior one, as the movement of the ship to the movement
      of the passengers on its deck.
The real life was not with these girls and these teachers, but with Hamlin; not in this
      Rhineland town, but in the distant places where he travelled. He wrote to her very often, from
      London, from Italy, from Greece and Egypt, and wherever he roamed about. At first she was
      surprised by the frequency of his letters; then she became accustomed to it as to a necessity
      of her existence, but a necessity to which she had no right. It seemed to her wonderful that
      he should write so often, and yet that the time which elapsed between his letters should be
      intolerable. In her great desire for them she used to have recourse to all manner of
      unconscious sophistications. She tried to train herself to disappointment, to chastise her own
      impatience and greediness, saying to herself, on the days when she thought that a letter might
      come, “It is impossible that there should be one to‐day,” although her heart fell when the
      prophecy sometimes came true; and she stayed up‐stairs, her eyes pinned to her book,
       when she heard the postman’s ring at the door, although
      that ring put her all into a tremble, and made her feel faint when she heard it. Thus with the
      letters from him. It was almost worse about her own answers. Often she could stand it no
      longer, and would begin a letter to Hamlin—only a few lines, which might be finished when his
      next letter should be received. The few lines turned to pages; yet the next day no letter
      would come, and she was unable to resist the temptation of writing even more; then, when the
      long‐wished letter at last came, there came with it such a number of new things to say, that
      her previous epistle must needs be torn up. Also, on re‐reading what she had written in answer
      to Hamlin, she was often filled with shame and fear. She had entertained him with such
      trifles, or been so pedantic, or put things in such a horrid way, she must needs tear it up
      and write once more. Then the length, the frequency of her letters frightened her: he would
      grow weary and impatient; she tried
       to write briefly, but failed; she tried to write rarely,
      making solemn resolutions to let two, three, or four days pass without answering him; but it
      was not of much use. She was dreadfully afraid lest Hamlin should think her a drag upon him,
      lest he should write one single letter more than he would naturally have done, from goodness
      to her. She never told him with what tremulous expectancy she waited for the post; with what
      heartburn she saw it come empty‐handed; with what avidity she read his letters, re‐read them
      furtively by snatches, carried them about in her pocket, made them last over days, till she
      knew them by heart, and, even then, how she was for ever doing up and undoing again the packet
      in which she kept them: if he knew that, he might feel obliged, being so kind, to write
      oftener; and that must not be.
Any one who had seen these letters which were her soul’s food, would have been surprised how
      they could awaken such a longing, how they could produce such emotion and
       keep alive such passion. In accordance with his whole plan
      of proceedings, Hamlin never once wrote to Anne as if there were any question of her ever
      becoming his wife. “My dear Miss Brown,” they all ceremoniously began, and ended off “Yours
      sincerely,” or “Your sincere friend, Walter Hamlin.” Affectionate they were, and even adoring,
      in the sense of looking up, or affecting to look up, at her as a sort of superhuman and
      wonderful creature, not quite conscious of its wonderfulness, perhaps, and certainly not
      responsible for it; the mental attitude of an artist before a beautiful model, of some Italian
      medieval poet before a Platonic mistress. There was not much perception of the reality of Anne
      Brown’s personality, nor indeed of her having any personality at all, being a thing with
      feelings, thoughts, hopes, interests of her own. Sometimes even poor Anne felt, on reading his
      letters, as if a lump of ice had been laid on her heart, when she came upon certain sentences;
      she could scarcely tell you why, but
       those sentences made her feel numb and alone, like a
      wrecked sailor at the north pole, for days. Then a reaction came; a burning indignation with
      herself, a burning adoration of Hamlin. She felt as if she had done him some injury; and once
      or twice, amid tears of shame, she wrote that she had become unworthy of his friendship—why,
      she could not well explain. But she tore it all up, or left only dim hints which Hamlin
      misunderstood, and became more respectful and adoring than ever, imagining that he must have
      said something to slight her. He really was adoring; it was such a lovely Madonna this, that
      it seemed to him that all the most beautiful and precious things of his mind, and other men’s
      minds, must be heaped up before her, like offerings of flowers, and rich ointments, and
      jewels, and music. He copied out pages of poetry and prose in his letters, and wrote to her
      the most lovely descriptions of things he saw or things he felt. Whenever he recollected a
      fine poem, or saw a beautiful scene,
       or was struck by a beautiful thought or a happy expression,
      he hastened to offer it to Anne, as the kings of the East offered gold and frankincense and
      embroidered raiment to the little Christ. That this was the result of his love, she never
      thought; for she never ventured to think that he condescended, or even would ever condescend,
      to love her; but it was in her eyes the result of his greatness, his generosity, the largesse, as it were, of his sublimity. About himself Hamlin would
      also write a great, great deal. Of singularly delicate mental fibre, and somewhat weak will,
      he was for ever tormented (or pretending to himself to be tormented, for to be so was pretty
      well a matter of choice) by unattainable ideals, by conflicts in his own nature: mysterious
      temptations of unspeakable things, beckoning his nobler nature into the mud, which he never at
      all specified, but which moved Anne to agonies of grief and admiration. The poor girl, not
      understanding how such things will shoot up in the poetic mind as a result of mere
       reading, and be nurtured there for a day for the sake of
      their strange colour, would screw up all her might to help him, writing to him to be patient,
      to be strong and bold, to remember the nobility of his nature,—strange passionately earnest
      entreaties written in tears, or in moods like those which send people to the stake; and which,
      in their ludicrous disproportionateness to their cause, would bring the tears to almost any
      one’s eyes who should read them.
A strange correspondence; and of which Hamlin’s half, although beautiful with all manner of
      artistic prettinesses, would have struck one as the less beautiful and interesting part: the
      suppressed passionateness, unconscious of itself, of the girl’s letters, her mixture of prim
      literary daintiness, absorbed from her reading, and of homely, tragically‐hurled‐about imagery
      (Hamlin used, without revealing the author, to read out some of these metaphors of Anne’s to
      his friends, pointing out their Elizabethan, Webster‐like character), were much
       more really striking. But Anne thought that what she wrote
      was unworthy to be seen by Hamlin; his condescension was mere goodness.
Hamlin, indeed, was very good to her—very gentle, courteous, generous, and assiduous. There
      was scarcely a book read by Anne Brown which was not of his selecting; and even in the midst
      of his journeys he used to elaborately select things for her reading, cutting out all but a
      very few pieces out of books of poetry, and copying and pasting into them all manner of
      extracts. “I should be grieved to think that anything save the very best should ever be read
      by you,” he often wrote. Thus, in the most singular way, Anne, only a nursemaid a few months
      before, became more deeply versed in poetry and poetical and picturesque history than most
      girls; Greek lyrism, Oriental mysticism, French æstheticism, but above all, things medieval
      and pseudo‐medieval; imbued with the imagery and sentiment of that strange eclectic school of
      our days which we still call pre‐Raphaelite. And
       such an education, while putting her in complete harmony
      with Hamlin’s aspirations and habits, also brought home to her the merit of Hamlin’s own work.
      Of his pictures, she had, indeed, only vague recollections, besides the little sketches,
      wonderful jewel‐coloured things, full of poetic suggestion, which he would send her at
      Christmas and on her birthday, to the amazement of the whole school. But he sent her a good
      deal of his poetry, and that only of the best. She did not always understand exactly the
      things to which he alluded, seeing only the beauty, the vague passionate wistfulness, the
      delicate sadness of what he wrote. His greatness perfectly confounded her. She found allusions
      to it in everything: in reading of dead poets, of Shelley, Keats, Goethe, a kind of passionate
      interest thrilled through her, for she seemed to be reading about Hamlin. And the same held
      good as to artists; they were all his kinsmen, of his blood—nay, they all, in a mystic manner,
      foreshadowed him.
Of these matters she never spoke to any of the girls. But often, while walking with them,
      her pride would swell with the thought that she belonged to him—that he had chosen her. And
      when the New Zealander, who was musical and had a fine voice, used sometimes to sing
      Schumann’s song, “Er der herrlichste von allen,” the words and the music sent a flood of love
      and pride to her heart; it was he, “he the most glorious of all,” who was thus gracious and
      good to her.
THUS one year went by; and then, slowly, another, while Anne Brown was being
      transformed from a nursemaid into a lady. Hamlin saw her twice during that time. Once, while
      Mrs Simson and Anne were staying in Paris—for he had begged that her holidays might be spent
      either in Switzerland, or in some place where she might see pictures and statues—when he
      suddenly turned up for a day on his way from England to Greece; and once at Coblenz. Mrs
      Simson was giving a party: suddenly into the parlour, filled with German matrons and damsels,
      with a sprinkling of professors and soldiers, was introduced a slight, fair man, who looked
      very young till you saw him closely, and at whose sight that
       sombre, quiet, strange, half‐Italian girl had suddenly
      turned crimson, and clutched a chair, as if afraid to fall, while the company stared and
      whispered. Hamlin left that same evening; and as the day in Paris had been spent in seeing and
      talking about pictures, so this afternoon passed in trifling conversation at Mrs Simson’s
      table. Alone, Anne scarcely saw him for an instant. Only, when he left Coblenz, he seized her
      hand as he stood at the door, and kissed it fervently. It seemed to her, during the long
      months of absence, that she would give all her life to see him again, to be able to tell him
      how grateful she was to him. Yet, in reality, his presence passed like the picture of a
      magic‐lantern on a wall; and she felt as if her lips were glued together: it was a vision, and
      no more. But on that second visit Hamlin had been dazzled. He had recognised from the first
      the exotic beauty and strangeness of the Perrys’ servant; he had seen in Paris that his
      judgment had been correct; but when, after eighteen months of schooling, he
       suddenly saw Anne again, it was as if he had never seen her
      before, a fresh revelation. A year and a half of a lady’s life, without bodily fatigue or
      mental weariness, had developed to the full the girl’s marvellous beauty: strange, mysterious,
      amazonian it was as ever; but it was as the regalness of a triumphant queen by the side of the
      queenliness of a deposed Amazon chief. The haughtiness which had struck him in the nursemaid
      of the little Perrys, was not diminished, but softened, by a kind of quiet graciousness and
      goodness. Hamlin remarked that she seemed, now that she was no longer humbled and cramped, to
      have a much kindlier spirit and a sense of humour which had at first seemed scarcely to exist,
      or to exist only in bitterness. But what struck him most of all was an indefinable change in
      Anne’s expression: the soul, which had lain as a tiny germ at the bottom of her nature, had
      expanded and come to the surface. She was as beautiful and singular as ever, but more manifold
      and subtle: her mind had increased threefold. Hamlin
       went away, intending that Anne should remain at Coblenz
      another year. But he found that his patience, hitherto inexhaustible, had suddenly departed.
      He found the time intolerably heavy on his hands. He travelled about in out‐of‐the‐way
      countries, having fragmentary love‐affairs, in a dreamy, irresponsible way, with other women;
      and sending Anne more letters than usual, and presents of all manner of outlandish
      stuffs—silver ornaments and so forth—which used to create great excitement at the school; but
      he fretted with impatience. Impatience, be it well understood, not to marry Anne, for he
      always thought of marriage as the return from, the end of, a sort of spiritual honeymoon; but
      impatience to commence that long courtship which had, from the beginning, been the object of
      his desires. He grew tired of their correspondence, found that he had exhausted all the
      delights of unconsciously revealed love, love budding and developing with the girl’s mind. It
      began to be mere repetition; and he scarcely knew
       what to write about now: the prologue had lasted long
      enough; the piece must begin.
One day, some two years or so after her arrival at Coblenz, Anne Brown received a letter in
      which Hamlin reminded her that she was twenty‐one, and that his guardianship had consequently
      come to an end already some months before; and suggested that, as he heard that her education
      was now completed, at least in so far as Coblenz went, he thought that it might be wiser if
      she came to England, where she would have better opportunities of continuing any special
      studies. Moreover, that his aunt, Mrs Macgregor, a widow without any children, was coming to
      settle in London, and that he thought it might be a good arrangement that she and Anne should
      live together, as Anne could scarcely take a house by herself. What did Miss Brown think of
      this arrangement? And would she authorise him to settle everything for Mrs Macgregor and her?
      Faintly and vaguely Anne thanked him for his forethought, and acquiesced in
       everything which he might be kind enough to decide upon.
      She had never realised her situation, she was not the sort of mind which has clear conceptions
      of the future, and she had been far too much absorbed, these two years, in the unreal present.
      Besides, Anne felt a confused pain, a disappointment, which prevented her attending to
      anything else. Hamlin had said nothing about himself, not a word as to whether he also would
      settle in London, or whether he intended continuing his wandering life. And she had not the
      courage to ask him. She was conscious of a coldness and emptiness in her heart, of the
      disappointment of some vague, unspoken hope. But why feel disappointed? or did she really feel
      disappointed at all? She believed that she cared for Hamlin only as for a benefactor, a
      divinity, a creature who might bestow affection but could not be asked for it; and this being
      the case, and knowing herself to have been perfectly satisfied and happy hitherto,
       she persuaded herself that she really did not feel
      disappointed about anything, when Hamlin thus wrote about her education and her plans and
      nothing else.
But as the winter drew to a close, there came another letter from Hamlin (all the
      intermediate ones had been only the usual talk about himself, and about books and scenery)
      telling her that, with a view to her living with his aunt, he had, as her ex‐guardian (he
      always spoke of himself as her guardian, completely ignoring Richard Brown) deemed it wise to
      employ part of her capital, which had been accumulating in his hands, in the purchase of the
      lease of a house at Hammersmith, which he was having prepared and furnished against her coming
      in May. “It is in a pretty neighbourhood, with the river in front and old houses and gardens
      all round,” he wrote. “What determined my choice, as I am sure it would have determined yours
      also, is that the house is itself more than a century and a
       half old, and has some fine trees in the garden. Flowers
      seem to grow well, as it is pretty well beyond reach of smoke. There are also some fine elms
      and poplars in front, all along the river‐side, which is old‐fashioned, and .not yet made into
      a modern embankment. It is rather far from the world; but the world is hideous, and the
      farther away from it the better, don’t you think? My aunt is busy about the practical
      household properties; I am getting in some of the more useless furniture. If you should
      dislike the arrangement, it can all be easily undone. I hope you will not disapprove of this
      step; the house is pretty well unique, and I had to decide on taking it, unless some one else
      was to snap it up; otherwise I should certainly have consulted you first. I trust you will
      forgive me.”
Anne put the letter down, and wondered whether she was dreaming. What was all this about
      buying and consulting her, employing her capital? What capital had she
       got? What right to be consulted? For a moment she felt
      quite bewildered; and then the full consciousness of Hamlin’s goodness rushed out and
      overwhelmed her, and she let her head fall on her desk and cried for sheer happiness. Then she
      thought it must all be a dream, and snatched the letter where it lay all crumpled, and
      smoothed it out trembling. Yes, there it all was. And then, as postscript, came this sentence,
      which made her heart leap:—
“There are two rooms additional on the garden, having a separate entrance from the
      embankment, and which I think you will not at present require for yourself. Would you perhaps
      let me rent them for a studio? My own lodgings are a long way from St John’s House (that is
      its name, for it was a priory once); but if I had my workshop there, I might hope to see you
      almost every day, if you would let me.”
The first dinner‐bell rang, and Anne, having hastily washed her eyes and smoothed her
       hair, ran down‐stairs, not knowing very well why the bell
      rang, or what it was all about. In the sitting‐room she found the girl from New Zealand, a
      little nervous creature, whom she had nursed through a bad fever, in her cold, absent way, and
      who had conceived a shy, intense passion for this beautiful strange creature, who seemed to
      her an unapproachable being from another world.
“I am going away,” cried Anne—she felt she must say it—“going away from school—to London,
      next month.”
The thin, nervous, anæmic little girl turned ashy‐white.
“Oh, are you really going?” she exclaimed faintly, for with Anne disappeared all the poor
      child’s sunshine and ideal from this dreary, worse than orphaned life, among girls who had too
      many occupations and interests to care for her.
“Are you really going, Annie? . . . Oh, I am so sorry!”
“Sorry?” cried Anne; “it is very nasty
       of you to be sorry—I am glad; oh, so glad! so glad!”
The little New Zealander had gone to the window, and was looking through its panes at the
      rainy street; she gave a little suppressed sob.
Anne felt as if she had committed a murder. She ran to the window, and seized the struggling
      small creature in her powerful arms, and knelt down before her, clasping her round the
      waist.
“Oh, forgive me! forgive me!” cried Anne, as the consciousness of the girl’s love, which she
      had never before perceived, came upon her, together with the shame and remorse at her
      heartlessness; “forgive me, forgive—I am a brute—a beast —oh dear, oh dear, that happiness
      should make me so wicked!”
The New Zealander smiled and buried her thin yellow face in the masses of Anne’s dark crisp
      hair.
“Will you remember me sometimes?” she asked; “I love you so much.”
Anne kissed the poor, pale, tear‐stained cheeks.
“Oh yes, I will always remember you,” she said.
But she was already thinking of Hamlin.
DURING that last month at school Anne was indefatigable: in the face of the vague
      future which was so rapidly approaching, she felt bound to clutch hold of the present,
      thinking that time which was employed in some way went less quickly. The fact was that she was
      in a state of great excitement—half impatience and half terror; she wished the days to go by
      quicker, and she wished them to go by slower; she was at once dragged wearisomely, and hurried
      along. At length it became a question no longer of weeks but of days. And then came another
      letter from Hamlin. He remembered the desire she had once expressed to go down the Rhine, to
      be on the sea: he proposed that she should come through Belgium and cross from Antwerp to
       London. “I am sure you will enjoy it much more than the
      vile, vulgar, usual route,” he wrote. But he did not tell her that he was unwilling she should
      get any impressions of England before meeting him, however slight they might be; that he
      preferred to meet her, in the evening, on the Thames wharf, to receiving his Amazon Queen, his
      mysterious and tragic Madonna, rather than in the shed at Victoria or Charing Cross. Anne did
      not care how she was to go: she was to go, to embark on a new life, to see him, to be seen by
      him. This thought, which had never struck her before, began to haunt her now: if he should be
      disgusted with her? if he should recognise that he had been mistaken in his choice?
The morning before her departure, Mrs Sireson handed Anne a letter at breakfast.
“Mr Hamlin has sent a girl to fetch you, dear,” she said.
“To fetch me?” cried Anne, in astonishment.
Mrs Simson opened the door—“Pray, come in,” she said.
A young woman entered, whose immaculate smartness and cheerful alertness never would have
      let one guess that she had just been travelling twenty‐four hours.
“This is Miss Brown,” said Mrs Simson. The girl curtsied, and waited for Miss Brown to
      speak. But Anne could not utter a word.
“Mrs Macgregor, Mr Hamlin’s aunt, engaged me as your travelling‐maid, miss,” said the young
      woman, handing a note to Anne.
It was from Hamlin, and ran briefly—
“MY DEAR MISS BROWN,—My aunt is unfortunately too delicate to admit of my asking her to
      fetch you from Coblenz; but she has engaged the bearer to be your maid, unless you have some
      previous. choice at Coblenz, in which case, please forgive our interference. She is highly
      recommended, and seems a good girl, and accustomed to travel. She will telegraph me how you
      are from Cologne and Antwerp
      . I shall await you Thursday evening on the wharf. Till
      then, farewell.—Your sincere and impatient friend,
“WALTER HAMLIN.”
For some unaccountable reason Anne felt quite angry. She did not require any one to travel
      with her; she did not want a maid. The very word maid seemed to bring up her whole
      past.
“You had better go and rest yourself,” she said to the girl coldly.
“How sweet and considerate!” said Mrs Simson, reading Hamlin’s note.
“I don’t want a maid!” cried Anne, angrily.
“A young lady of your age cannot travel alone, my dear,” answered Mrs Simson, blandly. But
      Anne felt miserable, she knew not why, and hated the maid.
Presently she went up to her room to pack her trunk. On opening the door she discovered the
      maid—her maid—on her knees, emptying
       the chest of drawers, and folding thing after thing.
“Please don’t do that!” cried Anne, turning purple. “I will do it myself, please.”
The girl stared politely, and answered in a subdued, respectfully chiding tone—
“I was only packing your trunk, miss.”
“I will do it myself!” cried Anne, excitedly.
“As you wish, madam,” was the maid’s icy answer; and she rose.
“Can I do nothing for you?” she said, standing by the door, with a reproachful, prim little
      face.
Anne was ashamed.
“You can help me if you like,” she answered, rather humbled; and she began folding her
      things. But the girl was much quicker than she, and Anne soon remained with nothing to do,
      looking on vacantly. She felt as if she would give worlds to get the girl away; she felt as if
      she ought to say to her, “Don’t do that for me; I am not a real lady; I am no better than you;
      I am a servant, a maid, myself
      ,”—and as if every moment of silence were a kind of deceit.
      At last she could bear it no longer—
“Please,” she cried, “let me pack my things myself; I have always packed them myself; I
      should be so glad if you would let me.”
The girl rose and retired.
“As you like, miss,” she replied, fixing her eyes on Anne’s strange excited face.
“She knows I am only a servant like herself, and she thinks me proud and ungrateful,”
      thought Anne.
The next evening, among the lamentations of Mrs Simson’s establishment, Anne Brown set off
      for Cologne. This first short scrap of journey moved her very much: when the train puffed out
      of the station, and the familiar faces were hidden by outhouses and locomotives, the sense of
      embarking on unknown waters rushed upon Anne; and when, that evening, her maid bade her good
      night at the hotel at Cologne, offering to brush her hair and help her to undress, she was
      seized with intolerable homesickness
       for the school,—the little room she had just left,—and she
      would have implored any one to take her back. But the next days she felt quite different: the
      excitement of novelty kept her up, and almost made it seem as if all these new things were
      quite habitual; for there is nothing stranger than the way in which excitement settles one in
      novel positions, and familiarises one with the unfamiliar. Seeing a lot of sights on the way,
      and knowing that a lot more remained to be seen, it was as if there were nothing beyond these
      three or four days—as if the journey would have no end; that an end there must be, and what
      that end meant seemed a thing impossible to realise. She scarcely began to realise it when the
      ship began slowly to move from the wharf at Antwerp; when she walked up and down the deserted
      and darkened deck watching the widening river under the clear blue spring night, lit only by a
      ripple of moonlight, widening mysteriously out of sight, bounded only by the shore‐lights,
      with here or there the
       white or blue or red light of some ship, and its long curl
      of smoke, making you suddenly conscious that close by was another huge moving thing, more
      human creatures in this solitude,—till at last all was mere moonlight‐permeated mist of sky
      and sea. And only as the next day—as the boat cut slowly through the hazy, calm sea—was
      drawing to its close, did Anne begin to feel at all excited. At first, as she sat on deck, the
      water, the smoke, the thrill of the boat, the people walking np and down, the children
      wandering about among the piles of rope, and leaning over the ship’s sides—all these things
      seemed the only reality. But later, as they got higher up in the Thames, and the unwonted
      English sunshine became dimmer, a strange excitement arose in Anne—an excitement more physical
      than mental, which, with every movement of the boat, made her heart beat faster and faster,
      till it seemed as if it must burst, and a lot of smaller hearts to start up and throb all over
      her body, tighter and tighter, till she had to press her
       hand to her chest, and sit down gasping on a bench.
The afternoon was drawing to a close, and the river had narrowed; all around were rows of
      wharves and groups of ships; the men began to tug at the ropes. They were in the great city.
      The light grew fainter, and the starlight mingled with the dull smoke‐grey of London; all
      about were the sad grey outlines of the old houses on the wharves, the water grey and the sky
      also, with only a faint storm‐red where the sun had set. The rigging, interwoven against the
      sky, was grey also; the brownish sail of some nearer boat, the dull red sides of some steamer
      hard by, the only colour. The ship began to slacken speed and to turn, great puffs and pants
      of the engine running through its fibres; the sailors began to halloo, the people around to
      collect their luggage: they were getting alongside of the wharf. Anne felt the maid throw a
      shawl round her; heard her voice, as if from a great distance, saying, “There’s Mr Hamlin,
      miss;” felt herself walking
       along as if in a dream; and as if in a dream a figure come
      up and take her hand, and slip her arm through his, and she knew herself to be standing on the
      wharf, in the twilight, the breeze blowing in her face, all the people jostling and shouting
      around her. Then a voice said—“I fear you must be very tired, Miss Brown.” It was at once so
      familiar and so strange that it made her start; the dream seemed dispelled. She was in
      reality, and Hamlin was really by her side.
IT is sad to think how little even the most fervently loving among us are able to
      reproduce, to keep within recollection, the reality of the absent beloved; certain as we seem
      to be, living as appears the phantom which we have cherished, we yet always find, on the day
      of meeting, that the loved person is different from the simulacrum which we have carried in
      our hearts. As Anne Brown sat in the carriage which was carrying her to her new home, the
      feeling which was strongest in her was, not joy to see Hamlin again, nor fear at entering on
      this new phase of existence, but a recurring shock of surprise at the voice which was speaking
      to her, the voice which she now recognised as that of the real Hamlin, but
       which was so undefinably different from the voice which had
      haunted her throughout those months of absence. Hamlin was seated by her side, the maid
      opposite. The carriage drove quickly through a network of dark streets, and then, on, on,
      along miles of embankment. It was a beautiful spring night, and the mists and fogs which hung
      over river and town were soaked with moonlight, turned into a pale‐blue luminous haze, starred
      with the yellow specks of gas, broken into, here and there, by the yellow sheen from some open
      hall‐door or lit windows of a party‐giving house: out of the faint blueness emerged the
      unsubstantial outlines of things—bushes, and overhanging tree‐branches, and distant spectral
      towers and belfries.
“You must be very tired,” said Hamlin.
“Oh no,” answered Anne, that repeated revelation of the real voice still startling her—“ not
      at all.”
He asked her how she had left those at Coblenz, and about her journey; she had to
       tell him about every picture and church she had seen at
      Cologne, Brussels, Bruges, and Antwerp. It is strange how people whose hearts have seemed full
      to bursting with things they have so long been waiting to say, will talk, when they meet
      again, like persons introduced for the first time at a dinner‐party. On they rolled, and on,
      through the pale moonlight mist by the river.
“I hope,” said Hamlin, when they had done discussing Van Eyck, and Rubens, and Memling—“I
      hope you will like the house and the way I have had it arranged; and,” he added, “I hope you
      will like my aunt. She is rather misanthropic, but it is only on the surface.”
His aunt! Anne had forgotten all about her; and her heart sank within her as the carriage at
      last drew up in front of some garden railings. The house door was thrown open, and a stream of
      yellow light flooded the strip of garden and the railings. Hamlin gave Anne his arm; the maid
      followed. A
       woman‐servant was holding the door open, and raising a lamp
      above her. Anne bent her head, feeling that she was being scrutinised. She walked speechless,
      leaning on Hamlin’s arm, and those steps seemed to her endless. It was all very strange and
      wonderful. Her step was muffled in thick, dark carpets; all about, the walls of the narrow
      passage were covered with tapestries, and here and there came a gleam of brass or a sheen of
      dim mirror under the subdued light of some sort of Eastern lamp, which hung, with yellow sheen
      of metal discs and tassels, from the ceiling. Thus up the narrow carpeted and tapestried
      stairs, and into a large dim room, with strange‐looking things all about. Some red embers sent
      a crimson flicker over the carpet; by the tall fireplace was a table with a shaded lamp, and
      at it was seated a tall, slender woman, with the figure of a young girl, but whose face, when
      Anne saw it, was parched and hollowed out, and surrounded by grey hair.
“This is Miss Brown, Aunt Claudia,” said Hamlin.
The old lady rose, advanced, and kissed Anne frigidly on both cheeks.
“I am glad to see you, my dear,” she said, in a tone which was neither cold nor insincere,
      but simply and utterly indifferent.
Anne sat down. There was a moment’s silence, and she felt the old lady’s eyes upon her, and
      felt that Hamlin was looking at his aunt, as much as to say, “Well, what do you think of her?”
      and she shrank into herself.
“You have had a bad passage, doubtless,” said Mrs Macgregor after a moment, vaguely and
      dreamily.
“Oh no,” answered Anne, faintly, “not at all bad, thank you.”
“So much the better,” went on the old lady, absently. “Ring for some tea, Walter.”
Hamlin rang. In a moment tea‐things were brought. Hamlin handed a cup to Anne, and offered
      her some cake.
“It is a long drive,” said Mrs Macgregor—
       “a long drive—all the way from Charing Cross.”
“Miss Brown came by the Antwerp boat—St Catherine’s Wharf—in the City, aunt,” corrected
      Hamlin.
“Ah, yes, to be sure—perhaps she would like some more milk in her tea. There is always such
      a delay at Charing Cross, isn’t there, Walter?”
But while Mrs Macgregor’s mind and words seemed to ramble vaguely about, her eyes were fixed
      upon Anne—large, melancholy dark eyes.
“You are glad to be back in London, aren’t you?” she asked.
“This is the first time I am in England,” answered Anne, shyly; all this dim room, with its
      vague sense of beautiful things all round, this absent‐minded lady, all seemed to harmonise
      with her own dreamlike sensations.
“Miss Brown was born in Italy,” explained Hamlin, probably for the hundredth time.
“Oh yes, of course; how stupid I am! And,
       Walter, there are some letters for you on the hall table,
      and Mr Chough came while you were out, and a man from—what’s his name—the upholsterer who
      writes poetry.”
“All right,” interrupted Hamlin.
“Won’t you have another cup, Margaret?” asked Mrs Macgregor.
“Her name is Anne, auntie—”
“Of course—I don’t know whether you take sugar in your tea or not, Rachel.”
Thus they went on for another half‐hour; Mrs Macgregor calling Anne by one wrong name after
      another, alluding to things which she could not possibly know anything about, and Hamlin
      trying to set matters right and induce Anne to talk.
“It is getting late,” he said, “and I fear Miss Brown must be tired after her long journey.
      I think you had better not keep her up any longer, aunt.”
“I am not tired,” protested Anne.
“You will be tired to‐morrow,” said the old lady.
“Yes,” added Hamlin, “and I must go. Good‐bye, aunt. Good night, Miss Brown; I hope you will
      have good dreams to welcome you home to England. I shall come in for lunch to‐morrow, Aunt
      Claudia. Good night. Good night, Miss Brown,” and he kissed her hand. “Good night, buon riposo e sogni felici.”
The few words of Italian almost brought the tears to Anne’s eyes; she felt so strange here,
      so far from everything—and yet what had she left behind? nothing, and no one who loved her,
      except that little girl from New Zealand. She felt terribly alone in the world.
Hamlin had evidently not trusted to his aunt to send Anne to bed, for the maid came in
      uncalled, and asked whether Miss Brown would not like to go up to her room.
“Of course,” said Mrs Macgregor; and taking a heavy old‐fashioned silver candlestick, she
      led Anne to her room. The poor girl was too weary and dazed to see what it was like. She sank
      on to a chair, and
       passively let the maid take off her hat and cloak.
“Shall I undress you, ma’am?” she asked.
Anne shook her head. “No, thanks.”
The girl retired, but Mrs Macgregor remained standing by Anne’s side, looking at the
      reflection in the glass of her pale, sad, tired face. “Undo your hair, Eliza dear,” said Mrs
      Macgregor.
Anne mechanically pulled out the hair‐pins, and the masses of iron‐black crisp hair fell
      over her shoulders.
The old lady looked at her for a moment.
“You are a beautiful girl, Anne,” she said, at last hitting the right name, “and,” she
      added, with a curious compassionate look, as she kissed the girl’s forehead, “are you really
      in love with Watty?”
Anne did not answer; but she felt herself redden.
“Marriage without love is a terrible thing,” said the old lady, “and in so far love is a
      mitigation of evil; but at the best it is only
       delusion. People must marry, but it is the misfortune of
      their lives. Good night, my dear.”
The words went on in Anne’s head, but she was too worn out to understand them. She soon fell
      asleep, and dreamed that Melton Perry had painted a picture, and that in a storm the ship’s
      crew said it must be used as a raft; and somehow it all took place at Florence, in the large
      pond in the Boboli Gardens.
ANNE BROWN awoke with a vague sense of gladness, but no very clear notion of where
      she was. Then it came upon her that this was Hamlin’s house, that she would actually see him
      again in a few hours; for it was as if she had not seen him at all the previous evening. The
      sun was streaming through the blinds, filling the room with a yellowish light; from without
      came a sound of leaves, of twittering birds, and the plash of the steamer‐paddles in the
      river. Anne looked round her and wondered. She had never seen such a room as this in her life:
      the wails were all panelled white, except where the panelling was interrupted by expanses of
      pale‐yellow chintz; the furniture also was of old‐fashioned chintz; the
       mirror was like what she had seen in the illustrations to
      an old copy of ‘Sir Charles Grandison’ which had belonged to Miss Curzon; the tapered chairs
      and tables to match. There were blue‐and‐white jars and pots all about, and old‐fashioned
      china things on the dressing‐table: except for the fac‐similes of drawings by Mantegna and
      Botticelli, and the coloured copies of famous Italian pictures which dotted the walls, the
      room might have been untouched since the days of the first Georges. She remembered that Hamlin
      had told her that the house was an old one; but she could not understand how everything came
      to look so very spick and span and new. She got up and went to the window. Below, in the
      little garden, was a lilac‐tree bursting into flower, and a yellow laburnum. A milkman’s cart
      was drawn up before the door. In front were the trees, in tender leaf, and the wooden parapet
      of the river‐walk; then the Thames, still wide, but so different from what she had seen it the
      previous evening: a clear grey stream
       reflecting green banks and cloudy blue sky, with here and
      there a barge or boat moored by the shore. The sky was blue, but covered with moist clouds,
      and it seemed to Anne that she could almost see where it arose on the horizon, so low did it
      seem. There was a scent of recent rain in the air, a shimmer of moisture on the leaves and
      grass. Was this London, which she had always fancied so noisy, and grimy, and vulgarly
      new?
Anne was already half dressed; but she spent some time wondering which of her frocks she
      should put on: they had been made expressly for London, and greatly admired by the girls at
      Coblenz, but now one looked more absurd and frumpish than the other. At last she put on a sort
      of greyish‐blue tweed, such as were then worn on the Continent, and having looked at herself
      rather anxiously in the glass, she opened her door and hesitatingly went out into the passage.
      All was perfectly quiet as she went down the carpeted stairs, wondering at the tapestry and
      brazen wrought shields and
       plaster casts and curious weapons which covered its walls;
      she could hear only the ticking of the old clock, which stood in its tall inlaid case in the
      hall. After the bustle of girls and servants at the Coblenz school, and the hundred and one
      noises of screeching well‐pulleys, whirring buckets, whistling starlings, singing and
      chattering servants, clattering crockery, which greet the early riser in an Italian
      house,—this silence seemed to her almost eerie, and she wandered about over the noiseless
      floors like the knight in the palace of the sleeping beauty. She found her way into the
      drawing‐room, where she had been received the previous evening; there was another next to it,
      and a kind of little library beyond. It was, indeed, an enchanted palace; the walls were all
      hung with pictures and drawings, and pieces of precious embroidery, and burnished oriental
      plates, and the floors spread with oriental carpets and matting, which gave out a faint,
      drowsy, sweet scent. The curious furniture was covered with old brocade and embroidery,
       and in all corners, on brackets and tables and in cabinets,
      were all manner of wonderful glass and china, and strange ivory and inlaid Japanese toys.
      There were flowers, also, about everywhere, and palms in the windows. In the library were more
      books than Anne had almost ever seen; and in the chief drawing‐room a beautiful grand piano,
      not made like those of our days, but with slight straight legs and a yellow case painted with
      faded‐looking flowers. Anne looked at everything with astonishment and awe: it was like the
      rooms in Walter Crane’s fairy books, with their inlaid chests and brocade couches, and
      majolica vases full of peacocks’ feathers.
It took her a long time to take it all in. She stole to the piano, opened it gently, and
      played the accompaniment of a song of Carissimi’s, which Hamlin was fond of, but inaudibly,
      without letting her fingers press down the keys. Then she looked at everything once more. She
      was beginning to get familiarised with the pictures on the wall; the pale, delicate
       bits of landscape; the deep‐coloured pictures of ladies in
      wonderful jewel‐like robes, with mysterious landscapes behind them; the drawings of strange,
      beautiful, emaciated, cruel‐looking creatures, men or women, with wicked lips and combed‐out
      locks,—all these things, which were like so many points of interrogation—when the door opened
      and the maid appeared.
“I have been looking for you everywhere, miss,” she said. “I thought, as you didn’t answer
      when I knocked, that you must still be asleep, so I carried your tea down again. Mrs Macgregor
      is going to have breakfast now, and says, would you mind having it in her room with her, miss,
      as she never goes down till lunch?”
Anne followed the servant to Mrs Macgregor’s room, where she found the old lady in her
      dressing‐gown, before a table spread with eighteenth‐century china, or what to Anne seemed
      such.
“What an hour you do get up at, Charlotte!” said Mrs Macgregor, kissing Anne on both
      cheeks. “We never think of getting up
       here before half‐past nine. Walter never comes in till
      luncheon‐time, because he has so far to come, and is up so late every night. Turn round; let
      me see what you look like this morning.”
And Mrs Macgregor made Anne turn round slowly. She looked at her approvingly.
“You’re a handsome girl, certainly,” she said; “not the style that used to be admired in my
      time,”—and she smiled with the faint smile of an old belle,—“girls had to be slight, and fair,
      and with little features then. But you’re just what they like now. I’m thankful at least that
      Walter has not brought home a bag of bones like the other beauties of his set.
       Loveliness in decay, that’s what I call their style; but you look a good
      flesh‐and‐blood girl.”
Anne did not know what to answer; she poured herself out a cup of tea in silence, and
      vaguely ate some bread and butter. The old lady was good‐natured, garrulous, flighty; but yet,
      beneath the shiftiness of her exterior, there seemed to be something real, something
       sad and bitter, when you looked at her thin drawn mouth and
      melancholy eyes.
“That’s a pretty frock you have on, my dear,” she pursued, “and I think it very
      becoming. But you’ll see that Watty won’t like it. He’s quite the—what do you call
      it?—medieval sort of thing,—no stays, and no petticoats, and slashings, and tags and
      boot‐laces in the sleeves, and a yard of draggled train—that sort of thing. Oh, you’ll find it
      a queer world, the world of Watty’s friends. Do you ever see ‘Punch’? That’s the sort of
      thing. They’re all great beauties and great painters and great poets, every man
      and woman of them. Wait till you see little Chough and young Posthlethwaite (I forget his real
      name). Ah, well, it’s perhaps better, after all, this kind of fooling, and masquerading, and
      writing verses about things people would horsewhip a man for saying in prose; it’s perhaps
      better, after all, for Watty, than the sort of life which we led when he was young”—and Mrs
      Macgregor became suddenly very silent.
After breakfast Anne was free until luncheon‐time, as Mrs Macgregor proceeded to lie down on
      her sofa and read Leigh Hunt’s ‘Religion of the Heart,’ or Fox’s ‘Religious Ideas,’ which Anne
      saw lying on her table. Hamlin’s aunt had evidently been an esprit
       fort in her youth, and possessed in her bedroom a whole library of what were once
      deemed literary firebrands, but might nowadays be described as mild, old‐fashioned
      free‐thinking literature. Anne roamed about the drawing‐room once more, looking again and
      again at the pictures, and opening the books, as people do in a strange house, before they can
      settle down. She timidly also opened the piano, but shut it again after a minute. Then she
      took a volume of Jean Paul out of a shelf, and carried it up into her room. Finding it too
      dull to read, and with an irritating sense that she ought to be doing something definite, she
      wrote a letter to Mrs Simson, and one to the little New Zealander. She felt so much like a
      fish out of water that Coblenz seemed more than her
       birthplace, and the people there more than mother and
      sisters. At last she heard one o’clock strike, and soon after there came a knock at the
      house‐door, and running to the window she saw Hamlin standing on the doorstep. She withdrew
      her head quickly, and went down to meet him.
He was more respectful than ever,—asked her how she had slept, and what she thought of the
      house.
“It’s lovely,” said Anne, “and it is so nice having everything old about one.”
“Everything old?” asked Hamlin.
“Yes; all the hangings, and chairs, and tables, and mirrors, are of the time of the building
      of the house, aren’t they?”
“Oh goodness, no,” answered Hamlin, sadly; “I only wish they were. They’re bran‐new, every
      stick of them. Everybody has them now; nobody makes anything except imitation old‐world
      things.”
“Why don’t they try and make something good and new—something out of their own
       heads, as the old workmen did?” asked Anne, looking with
      wonder upon these new things which seemed so old.
“There is nothing to nourish art nowadays,” said Hamlin, seating himself opposite her and
      looking her full in the face as he used to do long ago at the studio in Florence. “Art can’t
      live where life is trivial and aimless and hideous. We can only pick up the broken fragments
      of the past and blunderingly set them together.”
“But why should the life of to‐day be trivial and aimless and hideous?” asked Anne, a vague
      remembrance of things which she had heard her father say years ago about progress and modern
      achievements returning to her mind as it had never done when, in the letters which he used to
      write to her at Coblenz, Hamlin had said before what he was saying now.
“I don’t know why it should be,” replied Hamlin, “but so it is.”
“Can’t we prevent it?” asked Anne, scarcely thinking of what she was saying; conscious
       only that she was really once more in his presence.
Hamlin shook his head sadly.
“Why cannot we revive those?” he said, pointing to a bunch of delicate pale‐pink roses,
      which drooped withered in a Venetian glass. “What is dead is dead. The only thing that remains
      for us late comers to do is to pick up the faded petals and keep them, discoloured as they
      are, to scent our lives. The world is getting uglier and uglier outside us; we must, out of
      the materials bequeathed to us by former generations, and with the help of our own fancy,
      build for ourselves a little world within the world, a world of beauty, where we may live with
      our friends and keep alive whatever small sense of beauty and nobility still remains to us,
      that it may not get utterly lost, and those who come after us may not be in a wilderness of
      sordid sights and sordid feelings. Ours is not the mission of the poets and artists of former
      days; it is humbler, sadder, but equally necessary.”
“Oh, but you must not say that!” cried
       Anne. “What you do will last, don’t you know, like the
      things which people were able to do formerly.”
Hamlin shook his head, and remained for some time with his beautiful greenish‐blue eyes
      fixed on Anne, as she sat twisting and untwisting the fringe on the arm of her chair.
“There is one consolation, Miss Brown,” said Hamlin, rising from his chair and leaning
      against the chimney‐piece, all covered with Japanese cups and curious nick‐nacks, and not
      taking his eyes off her, “and that is, that even now, Nature, which is so barren of painters
      and poets, can produce creatures as wonderful as those who inspired the painters and poets of
      former times—a consolation, and at the same time a source of despair.”
Hamlin spoke these lover‐like words in a tone so cold, so sad, that Anne did not at first
      understand to whom he was alluding, and looked up rather in interrogation than in
      embarrassment.
A bell rang. “There’s lunch,” said Hamlin. “We must finish our discussion afterwards.”
“WON’T you take her out for a drive, Walter?” asked Mrs Macgregor, after lunch.
      “She must be curious to see something of London.”
Hamlin looked at Anne, as much as to say, “Do you really wish to go?”
“I am sure Miss Brown is too tired from her journey, aunt,” he said; “and what is there to
      take her to see in this beastly city?”
“I thought we might have a brougham and take her to see a few of your friends, Walter,”
      suggested Mrs Macgregor.
Poor Anne felt a sort of horror go all down her.
“Oh, please don’t!” she cried—“not to‐day; don’t take me to see any one, please.”
“It’s much wiser to let her rest,” said Hamlin, in a tone of annoyance.
“Won’t you just take the poor girl to Mrs Argiropoulo’s, Watty?” insisted his aunt. “It’s a
      sin to keep her mewed up at Hammersmith all day; and you know Mrs Argiropoulo was so anxious
      to see her at once.”
“Confound Mrs Argiropoulo!” exclaimed Hamlin. “I beg your pardon, Miss Brown, but do you
      feel inclined, after your long journey, to go and see a fat, fashionable lion‐huntress, with a
      snob of a husband who sells currants?”
“Not at all,” answered Anne, laughing. “I would much rather stay at home, really.”
“Very well; then I will show you the garden and my studio, if you don’t mind; and a great
      friend of mine, Cosmo Chough,—I think I sent you some of his poems about music. . . .”
“Oh yes,” cried Anne; “they are lovely—”
“I think little Chough’s poems perfectly indecent,” interrupted Mrs Macgregor. “I would much
      sooner let a girl read ‘Don Juan,’ or even ‘Candide,’ any day.”
Hamlin reddened, but laughed.
“Opinions differ; at any rate, Miss Brown knows only Chough’s best things; and when he is at
      his best, Chough is really very good and pure and elevated.”
“Ah, well,” merely remarked Mrs Macgregor.
“Cosmo Chough said he would look in about four,” went on Hamlin. “He is a strange creature,
      and sometimes says odd things.”
“Very odd things,” put in his aunt.
“But he is as pure‐minded a man as I know, and a real poet,” went on Hamlin—“indeed quite
      one of the best; and he is a great musician, and a most entertaining fellow—his only weakness
      is that he is a great republican and democrat, but would like to be thought the son of a
      duke.”
“The son of a duke? ” asked Anne, in surprise.
“Oh, the natural son, of course—forgive me, my dear,” said Mrs Macgregor. “People nowadays
      like anything illegitimate—it’s a
       distinction. It wasn’t in my day, but things have changed;
      and Mr Cosmo Chough would dearly like to be thought a bastard, especially a duke’s.”
Hamlin smiled.
“Poor Chough! Some one told him he was like Richard Savage one day, and that’s his pose.
      Would you like to come into the garden, Miss Brown?”
They went together into the strip of garden which lay behind the house. There were not many
      flowers out as yet, only a few peonies and lilacs, and a belated tulip or hyacinth, but there
      was green, daisied grass, and big grey‐mossed apple‐trees still in blossom; and across the low
      walls, covered with creepers, you saw big waving tree‐branches, and old brick houses covered
      with ivy: the birds were singing, and some hens clucking next door. It was very quiet and
      old‐world. Hamlin showed her all the rose‐buds which might soon come out, and the place where
      the lilies would be, and the espaliers for the sweet‐peas. Then
       they went into the two ground‐floor rooms which he was
      arranging for his studio: there were quantities of beautiful rare books and volumes of prints,
      and Persian and Japanese and old Italian metal‐work,and pottery all about, and easels with
      unfinished pictures evcrywhere—a great and beautiful confusion.
When he had showed her his properties, and she had reverently handled the things which had
      once belonged to Shelley and Keats, and the bundles of unpublished manuscripts, entrusted to
      Hamlin by living poets, they sat down in the studio and began to discuss various matters:
      Anne’s school life, her readings and lessons, Hamlin’s work, art, poetry, life, all sorts of
      things,—a long and drowsy afternoon’s talk, such as is possible only after a long
      correspondence between people become familiar without much personal intercourse, who, knowing
      each other’s mind, are now beginning to know each other’s face and ways and heart; and which
      has a charm quite peculiar to itself, like that of hearing
       for the first time, with full symphony of voices and
      instruments, some piece of music which we have learned to know and love merely from the dry
      score.
Anne had never felt so happy in all her life, and Hamlin not often happier in his, as they
      sat in the studio, talking over abstract questions, which seemed to acquire such a quite
      personal interest from those who were discussing them.
They were thus engaged when the servant announced Mr Cosmo Chough.
Anne’s heart sank at the thought of confronting one of Hamlin’s most intimate friends, and
      one of the poets who constituted the stars of his solar system. To Anne’s surprise Mr Chough
      did not at all resemble either Shelley or Keats, as she imagined; he was a little wiry man,
      with fiercely brushed coal‐black hair and whiskers, dressed within an inch of his life, but in
      a style of fashionableness, booted and cravated, which was quite peculiar to himself.
“Miss Brown,” said Hamlin, “let me introduce my old friend, Cosmo Chough.”
Mr Chough made a most fascinating bow, and swooped gracefully to the other end of the studio
      to fetch himself a chair near Anne’s. He was quite touchingly concerned in Anne’s journey and
      her sensations after it; and asked her whether she liked London, with a sort of expansive
      chivalry of manner, as of Sir Walter Raleigh spreading embroidered cloaks across puddles for
      Queen Elizabeth, which struck her as rather ridiculous, but very agreeable, as she had rather
      anticipated being scorned by Hamlin’s poetical friends. Anne thought Mr. Chough decidedly
      nice, with his oriental style of politeness, and magnificent volubility, constantly quoting
      poetry in various languages in a shrill and chirpy voice; moreover, he seemed to adore Hamlin,
      and this was enough to put him in her good graces. Mr Chough rapidly informed her what the
      principal poets in London and Paris (for he spoke of French things with an affectation
       of throaty accent and allusions to his “real country” which
      greatly puzzled Anne) were writing; and Anne felt so completely taken into confidence that she
      ventured to ask him whether he was himself writing anything at present, as she had greatly
      admired some short pieces of his which Hamlin had sent her.
Mr Chough was as modest as he was polite. His eyes shone, and he clasped his small hands in
      ecstasy at the idea of anything of his having pleased Miss Brown. He then proceeded to tell
      her that he had an idea for a long poem—a sort of masque or mystery‐play—to be called the
      Triumph of Womanhood.
“We were trying over some of Jomelli’s music a night or two ago, at Isaac the great
      composer’s,” he explained; “magnificent music, which no one can sing nowadays, and we feebly
      crowed, when in the midst of the great burst of the “Gloria” I seemed to have revealed to me a
      vision of a mystic procession of women going in triumph; I understood,
       in a sort of flash, the mysterious and real regalness of
      Womanhood.”
“It must have been very beautiful,” said Anne, naively.
Mr Chough had opened the piano, and began playing, in a masterly way, a fragment of very
      intricate fugue.
“Do you notice that?” he asked: “that sudden modulation there—ta ta ti, la la la—from A
      minor to E major,—that somehow mysteriously brought home to me one of the figures of that
      triumphal procession, and her I have tried to describe. If you like, I can repeat you the
      first few lines; it is called ‘Imperia of Rome.’”
“How good of you,” cried Anne.
“I think we had better put off hearing it till you have composed rather more of the poem,”
      interrupted Hamlin.
Cosmo Chough looked mortified, and Anne wondered why Hamlin should silence his old
      friend.
“Tell me all about Imperia of Rome,” she
       asked. “Who was she?—had she anything to do with the
      Scipios, or Cato, or Tarquin?”
“Imperia was not an ancient Roman,” explained Chough; “she lived at the beginning of the
      sixteenth century, and it is said that all the cardinals and poets and artists of Rome, nay,
      the Pope himself, accompanied her coffin when she died.”
“Why, what had she done?—was she a saint?”
“The inscription on her tomb is, I think, the most truly noble and Roman ever composed on
      any woman,” proceeded Chough; “Imperia . . .”
“Miss Brown doesn’t understand Latin, Cosmo,” interrupted Hamlin, roughly, “and I am sure
      she would take no interest in Imperia or her epitaph. Supposing you let Miss Brown hear some
      of that beautiful Jomelli Mass you were speaking about. Chough is one of the finest musicians
      I know,” he explained to Anne, “and he is quite famous
       for singing all sorts of forgotten old Italian
      masters.”
Chough sat down and began to sing, in a warbling falsetto, but with the most marvellous
      old‐world grace and finish.
Anne did not attend. She was wondering about Imperia of Rome. Why had Hamlin cut short
      Chough? What had Imperia done? The remarks of Mrs Macgregor came to her mind; and she felt
      indignant, and her indignation was all the greater, perhaps, because Chough’s offence was
      vague and unknown—how nobly and simply Hamlin had silenced him! She wondered whether he was
      very angry with Chough, and whether Chough’s feelings had been much hurt. She felt rather
      sorry for the sharp way in which he had been treated, and terrified lest she should be a
      source of misunderstanding between Hamlin and his friends. She greatly praised Chough’s
      singing.
“Will you sing?” cried the little poet, supplicatingly; “you must have a beautiful
       voice. I know it from your way of speaking.”
Anne refused in terror.
“Do sing, Miss Brown,” urged Hamlin. So she took her courage with both hands, as she
      expressed it, and sang an air by Scarlatti, Chough accompanying. She made several false
      starts, and sang the wrong words almost throughout, for she felt a lump in her chest. Anne had
      a deep, powerful, rather guttural voice, not improved by singing modern German songs at
      Coblenz; but the voice was fine, and she had caught something of the manner of her former
      protectress, Miss Curzon, who had been a great singer in her day.
Chough burst out into applause.
“A splendid voice!” he cried; “you must sing, Miss Brown—you must
      study—I will come and practise your accompaniments for you, if you will permit me.”
Anne looked at Hamlin; such an offer, on so slight an acquaintance, surprised her.
“You will let Chough teach you, won’t you,
       Miss Brown?” asked Hamlin, approvingly. He afterwards told
      her that Chough spent whatever leisure remained from an inferior Government offce, in which,
      together with a whole band of other poets, he was employed, in playing accompaniments for
      various young ladies whom he considered, each singly, the most divine types of womanhood whom
      he had ever met.
Chough was in high spirits, and proceeded to display to Anne two or three relics which he
      carried on his person. A fervent though not very orthodox Catholic, he was prone to religious
      mysticism: on his watch‐chain hung a gold cross, containing a bit of wood from St Theresa’s
      house, which a friend had brought him from Spain; by its side dangled a large locket,
      enclosing a wisp of yellow hair.
“It is a lock of Lucretia Borgia’s,” he said, displaying it with as much unction as he had
      manifested for St Theresa—“a bit of the one which Byron possessed,—the most precious thing I
      have in all the world.”
“She was rather an insignificant character though, on the whole, wasn’t she?” remarked Anne,
      not knowing what to say,—“a sort of characterless villain, the Germans say.”
Cosmo Chough was indignant.
“Insignificant!” he cried—“ a Borgia insignificant! Why, her blood ran with evil as the
      Pactolus does with gold. All women that have ever been, except Sappho and Vittoria
      Accoramboni, and perhaps Faustina, were lifeless shadows by her side . . .”
“I don’t believe in those sort of women having been very remarkable,” said Anne, in her
      frank, stolid way, “except for disreputableness.”
“But that is just it,—that which you call disreputableness, my dear Miss Brown,” cried
      Chough, “therein is their greatness, in that fiery . . .”
Anne shook her head contemptuously.
“I daresay great women have often committed great crimes,” she said; “but then they have had
      great plans and ambitions; they
       have not been mere wretched slaves of passion;” and she
      relapsed into silence.
She had had what Hamlin used to call her Amazon or Valkyr expression as she spoke; and he
      felt, as he had felt in Florence, the persuasion that this proud and sombre woman must have in
      her future some great decision, some great sacrifice of others or of herself.
While they were talking, the servant entered to tell Miss Brown that Mrs Argiropoulo was in
      the drawing‐room with Mrs Macgregor.
“Confound Mrs Argiropoulo!” exclaimed Hamlin between his teeth, “to come intruding so
      soon.”
“Is that the lion‐hunting lady?” asked Anne.
“Yes; I suppose you must receive her, as she has called on you.”
“Called on me?” repeated Anne in amazement; “you mean on Mrs Macgregor. Why, how should she
      have heard of me?”
“All London has heard of you, Miss Brown,” exclaimed Chough enthusiastically, as he opened
      the door for her; “at least all that deserves
       to be called London. And Mrs Argiropoulo said last night at
      Wendell the R.A.’s, that she was determined to see you before any other creature in town. You
      see I have gained a march upon her.”
Anne did not answer, but she grew purple. So every one was curious to see this nursery‐maid
      whom the great Hamlin had cast his eyes on, and whom he had generously educated; for the first
      time her heart burst with indignation and ruffled pride. But after a moment, as she sat in the
      drawing‐room, after frigidly returning the fat and fashionable lion‐huntress’s affectionate
      greeting, her conscience smote her: who was she, that she should feel thus? if she did depend
      entirely on Hamlin’s generosity, ought she not to be grateful merely, and proud? and if his
      friends felt curious to see her, was it not natural, he being what he was; and had she a right
      to feel annoyed at their curiosity, at their knowing all about her? It had been mean and
      unworthy. Yet she could not help feeling a sort of vague anger
       at she knew not what, as the lady chattered away, in glib
      Greek‐English, about poets, and studios, and dinner‐parties; and she answered Mrs Argiropoulo
      only in monosyllables.
“You must let me take your ward into society a little, dear Mrs Macgregor,” lisped the Greek
      lady, “for I know you hate going out of an evening. Miss Brown must meet some of the principal
      persons of our set.”
She was very fat, very good‐natured, and extremely vulgar‐looking, her huge body encased in
      a medieval dress of flaming gold brocade. “What in the world can she have to do among artists
      and poets?” thought Anne.
“Her husband is in the currant‐trade,” whispered Chough—“an awful old noodle, but he buys
      more pictures of our school than any one else. Their house is a perfect wonder.”
“My aunt is going to ask a few friends to meet Miss Brown first here,” answered Hamlin;
      “perhaps you will join them, Mrs Argiropoulo. There’s plenty of time to think of
      party‐going.”
“Very good, very good,” answered Mrs Argiropoulo; “meanwhile perhaps I may have the pleasure
      of taking Miss Brown out for a drive once or twice.”
“I am sure she will be delighted,” said Hamlin.
“I hate that woman!” exclaimed Hamlin, as he returned from escorting the wife of the
      currant‐dealer to the door; “an odious, inquisitive, vulgar brute.”
“She looks good‐natured, I think,” insinuated Anne.
“Oh, every one’s good‐natured!”
“In your set, Watty?” asked Mrs Macgregor, bitterly.
“Every one’s good‐natured!” continued Hamlin, throwing himself back in his chair; “and so’s
      Mrs Argiropoulo. But a kind of grain that sets my nerves off. That’s the misfortune of London,
      that a lot of vulgar creatures, merely because they buy our pictures and give dinners, have
      come and invaded our set, showing us, like so many wild beasts, to
       the fashionable world. Positively, I shall have to give up
      London. But you will find,” he added, turning to Anne, “one or two houses still remaining
      where one meets only superior people—the houses where artistic life really goes on.”
“Upon whipped cream and Swiss champagne,” said Mrs Macgregor—“what one might call the real,
      genuine, four hundred a‐year intellectual world. Ah, well, Walter! you needn’t look
      reproachful; but it is droll what sort of people you have come to associate
      with—clerks and penny‐a‐liners, each of them a great poet.”
Hamlin merely smiled. “One must make a world for one’s self,” he said, and looked at
      Anne.
When Mr Cosmo Chough had taken his seat next to Mrs Argiropoulo, the portly lady deluged him
      with questions and replies as her landau rolled away.
“On the whole, I’m quite as well pleased not to take her out at once,” she said. “I’m
       not at all so sure about her. She seems to me too big and
      lumpish and healthy‐looking. I should like to have one or two opinions first—one or two
      artists’, and young Posthlethwaite’s, and little O’Reilly’s—of course, they’ll see her at old
      Smith’s, or Mrs Saunders’s, or some such house—and all depends on their
      verdict.”
“I know what mine is,” cried little Chough, enthusiastically—“that she is the
      divinest woman, in the cold, imperial style, with a latent and strange smouldering passion,
      that I ever set eyes on. And as to that flabby elephant Posthlethwaite, and that little hop,
      skip, and jump of an impudent jackanapes O’Reilly, I wonder how you can think
       their opinion worth having, or, indeed, their presence supportable.”
At this grand winding up Mrs Argiropoulo laughed loudly.
“I know you don’t like those young men,” she said. “Posthlethwaite’s your rival, they say;
      he writes even more improper things
       than you do; and you can’t forgive Thaddy O’Reilly calling
      your poems the loves of the cannibals. Oh, I know you poets! Now, shall I drive you home?
      What’s your address?”
This was an old joke, for Mr Cosmo Chough always surrounded his dwelling‐place with mystery,
      and had his letters addressed to his office.
“Pray don’t inconvenience yourself,” he said in a stately way; “set me down at the corner of
      Park Lane. I shall walk home in less than a minute from there.”
“To the corner of Park Lane,” ordered Mrs Argiropoulo of her footman, who knew, as well as
      his mistress and every other creature in what they called London, that Mr Cosmo Chough lived
      in a secluded terrace in Canonbury.
ANNE BROWN found that Hamlin, or, as he studiously put it, Mrs Macgregor, had made
      several engagements for her before her arrival; and before she could thoroughly realise that
      the school, the journey from Coblenz, were things of the past, she found herself being led
      about, passively, half unconsciously, through the mazes of æsthetic London. It was all very
      hazy: Anne was informed that this and that person was coming to dinner or lunch at
      Hammersmith; that this or that person hoped she would come and dine or take tea somewhere or
      other; that such or such a lady was going to take her to see some one or other’s studio, or to
      introduce her at some other person’s house. She knew that they were all
       either distinguished poets, or critics, or painters, or
      musicians, or distinguished relations and friends of the above; that they all received her as
      if they had heard of her from their earliest infancy; that they pressed her to have tea, and
      strawberries, and claret‐cup, and cakes, and asked her what she thought of this picture or
      that poem; that they lived in grim, smut‐engrained houses in Bloomsbury, or rose‐grown
      cottages at Hampstead, with just the same sort of weird furniture, partly Japanese, partly
      Queen Anne, partly medieval; with blue‐and‐white china and embroidered chasubles stuck upon
      the walls if they were rich, and twopenny screens and ninepenny pots if they were poor, but
      with no further differences; and, finally, that they were all intimately acquainted, and spoke
      of each other as being, or just having missed being, the most brilliant or promising specimens
      of whatever they happened to be.
At first Anne felt very shy and puzzled; but after a few days the very vagueness which
       she felt about all these men and women, these artists,
      critics, poets, and relatives, who were perpetually reappearing as on a merry‐go‐round,—nay,
      the very cloudiness as to the identity of these familiar faces—the very confusion as to
      whether they were one, two, or three different individuals,—produced in Miss Brown an
      indifference, an ease, almost a familiarity, like that which we may experience towards the
      vague, unindividual company met on a steamer or at a hotel.
And little by little, out of this crowd of people who seemed to look, and to dress, and to
      talk very much alike,—venerable bearded men, who were the heads of great schools of painting,
      or poetry, or criticism, or were the papas of great offspring; elderly, quaintly dressed
      ladies, who were somebody’s wife, or mother, or sister; youngish men, with manners at once
      exotically courteous, and curiously free and easy, in velveteen coats and mustard‐coloured
      shooting‐jackets or elegiac‐looking dress‐coats, all rising in poetry, or art, or
       criticism; young ladies, varying from sixteen to
      six‐and‐thirty, with hair cut like medieval pages, or tousled like mœnads, or tucked away
      under caps like eighteenth‐century housekeepers, habited in limp and stayless garments,
      picturesque and economical, with Japanese chintzes for brocade, and flannel instead of stamped
      velvets—most of which young ladies appeared at one period, past, present, or future, to own a
      connection with the Slade school, and all of whom, when not poets or painters themselves, were
      the belongings of some such, or madly in love with the great sonneteer such a one, or the
      great colourist such another;—out of all this confusion there began gradually to detach
      themselves and assume consistency in Anne’s mind one or two personalities, some of whom
      attracted, and some of whom repelled her, as we shall see further on; but to all these people,
      vague or distinct, attractive or repulsive, Miss Brown felt a kind of gratitude—something, in
      an infinitesimal degree, of the thankfulness for undeserved kindness and courtesy which
       constituted a large part of her love for Hamlin.
It was a curious state of things, thus to be introduced by a man whom she knew at once so
      much and so little, to this exclusive and esoteric sort of people; and whenever the thought
      would come upon her how completely and utterly she, the daughter of the dockyard workman of
      Spezia, the former servant of the little Perrys, was foreign to all this, it made her feel
      alone and giddy, like one standing on a rock and watching the waters below.
Such was the condition of things when one morning, about three weeks after Anne’s arrival,
      Hamlin put upon the luncheon‐table a note addressed to Miss Brown.
“It’s an invitation to Mrs Argiropoulo’s big party on the twenty‐seventh,” he said; “you
      must go, Miss Brown. She’s an awful being herself; but you’ll see all the most interesting
      people in London at her house. Edith Spencer or Miss Pringle can take you, if Aunt Claudia
      feel too tired.”
“Aunt Claudia always feels too tired,” answered Mrs Macgregor, in a bitter little tone. Anne
      could not quite understand this amiable and cynical old lady, who was at once devotedly
      attached to her nephew, and perpetually railing at his friends. A fear seized her lest, in her
      vague, almost somnambulic introduction into æsthetic society, she might have unconsciously
      neglected the woman who, proud of her birth as she was, requested this workman’s daughter to
      address and consider her as her aunt.
“Oh, won’t you go?” cried Anne; “won’t you go, Mrs Macgregor?”
“The fact is,” hesitated Hamlin, “that—you see—Mrs Argiropoulo invites comparatively few
      people, and—”
“That she wants only celebrities, or great folk, or pretty girls,” interrupted Aunt Claudia,
      with her friendly cynicism, “or, as she expresses it, that she wants no padding. So you must
      go with Mrs Spencer or Miss Pringle, my dear.”
“But it is abominable; it is most rude of Mrs Argiropoulo; and I certainly won’t go anywhere
      where Aunt Claudia has not been invited.”
“Nonsense, Nan,” silenced the old lady; “you’re not up to this lion‐hunting world yet. Where
      there are so many geniuses on the loose, and so many professed beauties, there are no chairs
      for old women, except countesses or school board managers.”
“But since you think Mrs Argiropoulo hateful,” persisted Anne, addressing Hamlin, “why
      should you wish me to go? You know I would much rather not; and I think, considering her
      rudeness to your aunt, you ought not to wish me to go.”
“As you choose, Miss Brown,” cried Hamlin, peevishly.
“Don’t be absurd, Anne—you must go,” insisted Mrs Macgregor. “Listen: Watty has actually
      been addling his brains doing dressmaking; he has invented a dress for you to go to the party,
      so you will break his heart if you refuse.”
Anne looked in amazement; and Hamlin reddened.
“I hope you will not deem it a liberty on my part, Miss Brown,” he said; “but as I knew that
      this invitation was coming, I ventured to make a sketch of the sort of dress which I think
      would become you, and to give it to a woman who has made dresses from artists’ directions; of
      course, if you don’t think it pretty, you won’t dream of putting it on. But I could not resist
      the temptation.”
Miss Brown scarcely knew what to say or feel: there was in her a moment’s humiliation at
      being so completely Hamlin’s property as to warrant this; then she felt grateful and ashamed
      of her ingratitude.
“If you had shown me the sketch, I daresay I could have made up the dress myself,” she
      said.
“I fear my sketch might not have been very intelligible to any one who had not experience of
      making such things.”
“Perhaps not,” answered Anne, thinking of
       all the dresses for Miss Curzon and the little Perrys which
      she had made in her day. “It was very good of you, Mr Hamlin.”
“What an idiot I was to let the cat out of the bag!” exclaimed Mrs Macgregor when her nephew
      was out of hearing. “I’ve spoilt your pleasure in the frock; and there’s Walter sulking
      because he thinks you won’t like it.”
“I am very ungrateful,” said Anne, sighing as she stooped over her book, and feeling all the
      same that she wished Hamlin would let her make up her dresses herself.
A few days later the dressmaker came to try on the dress, or rather (perhaps because Hamlin
      did not wish Anne to see it before it was finished) its linings and a small amount of the
      Greek stuff of which it was made; but it was not till the very afternoon of Mrs Argiropoulo’s
      party that the costume was brought home finished. Miss Brown was by this time tolerably
      accustomed to the eccentric garb of æsthetic circles, and she firmly believed that it was the
      only one which a self‐respecting
       woman might wear; but when she saw the dress which Hamlin
      had designed for her, she could not help shrinking back in dismay. It was of that Cretan silk,
      not much thicker than muslin, which is woven in minute wrinkles of palest yellowy white; it
      was made, it seemed to her, more like a night‐gown than anything else, shapeless and yet
      clinging with large and small folds, and creases like those of damp sculptor’s drapery, or the
      garments of Mantegna’s women.
“I must get out a long petticoat,” said Anne, appalled.
“Oh please, ma’am, no,” cried the dressmaker. “On no account an additional petticoat—it
      would ruin the whole effect. On the contrary, you ought to remove one of those you have on,
      because like this the dress can’t cling properly.”
“I won’t have it cling,” cried Miss Brown, resolutely. “I will let alone the extra
      petticoat, but that’s as much as I will do.”
“As you please, ma’am,” answered the
       woman, and continued adjusting the limp garment with the
      maid’s assistance.
Anne walked to the mirror. She was almost terrified at the figure which met her. That
      colossal woman, with wrinkled drapery clinging to her in half‐antique, half‐medieval
      guise,—that great solemn, theatrical creature, could that be herself?
“I think,” she said in despair, “that there’s something very odd about it, Mrs Perkins. It
      looks somehow all wrong. Are you sure that something hasn’t got unstitched?”
“No indeed, madam,” answered the dressmaker, ruffled in her dignity. “I have exactly
      followed the design; and,” she added, with crushing effect, “as it’s I who execute the most
      difficult designs for the Lyceum, I think I may say that it could not be made
      differently.”
The Lyceum! Anne felt half petrified. What! Hamlin was having her rigged out by a stage
      dressmaker!
“Mr Hamlin is down‐stairs, Miss Brown,”
       hesitated the maid, as Anne bade her help her out of this
      mass of limp stuff. “He said he would wait to see you after the dressmaker had left, if you
      had no objection.”
“Watty wants to see you in your new frock, my dear,” said Mrs Macgregor, putting her head in
      at the door. “Come along.”
Anne followed down‐stairs, gathering all that uncanny white crape about her. For the first
      time she felt a dull anger against Hamlin.
He met her in the dim drawing‐room.
“My hair isn’t done yet,” was all Miss Brown could say, tousling it with her hands.
“Leave it like that—oh, do leave it like that!” exclaimed Hamlin; “you can’t think how”—and
      he paused and looked at her, where she stood before him, stooping her massive head
      sullenly—“you can’t think how beautiful you look, Anne!”
It was the first time he had called her by her Christian name since that scene, long ago, in
      the studio at Florence.
“Forgive me, dear Miss Brown,” he apologised
      . “I knew how such a dress must suit you, and yet it has
      given me quite a shock to see you in it.”
“It was very kind of you to have it made for me,” said Anne, “and the stuff is very pretty
      also; and—and I am so glad you like me in it.”
Hamlin kissed her hand. He was more than usually handsome, and looked very happy.
“Thank you,” he said; “I must now go home and dress for that stupid dinner‐party. I will
      meet you at Mrs Argiropoulo’s at half‐past ten or eleven. I suppose Edith Spencer will call
      for you soon after dinner. Good‐bye.”
He looked at her with a kind of fervour, and left the room.
Anne sat down. Why did that dress make such a difference to him? Why did he care so much
      more for her because she had it on? Did he care for her only as a sort of live picture? she
      thought bitterly. But, after all, it was quite natural on his part to be pleased, since he had
      invented the dress. And it was
       very good of him to have thought of her at all. And thus,
      in a state of enjoyable repentance, she awaited the hour to go to Mrs Argiropoulo.
Mrs Spencer, a very lovable and laughable little woman, whose soul was divided between her
      babies and fierce rancours against all enemies of pre‐Raphaelitism, hereditary, in virtue of
      her father, Andrew Saunders, in her family, came punctually, marvellously attired in grey
      cashmere medieval garments, a garland of parsley and gilt oak‐leaves in her handsome red hair.
      On seeing Anne, who stood awaiting her by the fireplace, she could not repress an exclamation
      of admiration.
“Yes,” answered Anne, unaccustomed to have her looks admired at Florence and at Coblenz; “it
      is a very wonderful costume, isn’t it? Mr Hamlin designed it for me. I think it was so kind of
      him; don’t you?”
“Kind? I see nothing kind about it. Walter” (she always spoke of him thus familiarly,
      because he had worked as a youth in
       her father’s studio) “is simply head over ears in love with
      you, my dear.”
Anne shook her head.
“Oh no,” she answered, with a sort of reasoned conviction, “he is merely very good to me,
      that’s all—and perhaps he likes me also, of course. But that’s all.”
“You know nothing of the world, Annie; and still less of Walter. He has never in his life
      been fond of any one except when in love. I’ve not known him these fifteen years for
      nothing.”
“I think you are mistaken,” said Anne, quietly.
“I think you are not aware, my dear girl, that you are the most beautiful woman Walter has
      ever seen.”
MISS BROWN felt very excited as the brougham drew up at Mrs Argiropoulo’s, and they
      entered her large house, blazing with lights and crammed with flowers. She followed Mrs
      Spencer timidly up‐stairs; but the men who crowded the landing never guessed that this
      majestic and imperturbable creature could possibly be nervous. At the top of the stairs,
      receiving her guests, an occupation (called seeing a few friends) which excluded her from her
      own drawing‐room the best part of the evening, was Mrs Argiropoulo, gorgeous in old lace and
      diamonds, and withal excessively vulgar.
“I am so glad to see you, dear Miss Brown,” she exclaimed to Anne’s
      astonishment, despatching the other comers with a mere frigid handshake. “I do think it is
       so good of you to come.”
“I wanted to come.”
“You are such a darling,” went on the fat Greek lady. “Come along—I have kept
      seats for you and Mrs Spencer for the recitation. Dear old Gosselin is going to recite for
      us—he is staying with us. I beg your pardon”—this last remark was addressed to a compact crowd
      of ladies and gentlemen on the threshold of the largest reception‐room, into which the lady of
      the house summarily elbowed her way.
“Follow me,” she whispered, as Anne, bewildered among the lights and noise, tried to pick
      her way over the trailing skirts, and every one turned to stare as she passed—“Here,
      Euphrosyne”—perceiving one of her big bouncing daughters in the crowd—“I want to introduce you
      to Miss Brown. Do
       keep that chair to the left for the Duchess of
      Orkney—mind.”
The spacious drawing‐room was filled, as for a theatrical performance, with rows of chairs,
      wellnigh occupied already. Into the very first of these Mrs Argiropoulo led Anne and Mrs
      Spencer.
“Sit down,” she whispered. “I do hope you’ll enjoy yourself, Miss Brown. You’ll hear
      Gosselin beautifully here. Oh dear, there’s the dear Marchioness of Epsom; goodbye”—and she
      whirled off her portly person.
“Goodness!” whispered Mrs Spencer, “old Argey has actually put us into the best places!”
Anne looked round. In front was a vacant space, with an open piano, and some chairs in a
      corner facing the company. All round and behind were chairs, and only a little gangway
      remained leading to the piano, next to where Mrs Argiropoulo had placed Anne. She had never
      seen such a crowd of magnificently and oddly dressed people in her life. Old ladies in velvet
      and diamonds,
       young ones in Worth toilets, or weirdly attired in lank robes
      and draperies, with garlands of lilies or turbans, or strings of sequins in their disorderly
      locks.
“I scarcely know any one here,” said Mrs Spencer, looking round like a rapid little bird,
      “except one or two artists—there are three or four R.A.’s—horrible creatures, to think the
      public is so wickedly infatuate as to buy their pictures! Will Englishmen ever have any poetic
      feeling in art? Papa would rather die than be an Academician. There’s little Thaddy
      O’Reilly—horrid little jackanapes—in the door. That old flat‐faced man is Lord Durrant, the
      critic. All the frumpy people with the diamonds must be peeresses, I’m sure. There’s Cosmo
      Chough just come in,—they’re all looking about for somebody or other. There’s Browning talking
      to old Argiropoulo. Oh, here’s little Thaddy! How do you do, Mr O’Reilly?”
Mr O’Reilly, a callow critic who united æstheticism with frivolity, bowed, and cast
       curious glances at Anne. For a moment she felt horribly
      ungrateful about the dress. She was sure that little O’Reilly was thinking that it was a
      night‐gown.
“Who’s the lion to‐night?” asked Mrs Spencer.
Mr O’Reilly fixed his eyes on Anne, and answered languidly, with a faint smile—
“Why, how can you ask, Mrs Spencer? Have we not all been invited expressly to meet Monsieur
      Gosselin and his charming friends, the ladies from the French comedy? No one comes to see
      lions or lionesses here, it is much too intellectual for that.”
“Do tell me who is the lion of to‐night,” asked Mrs Spencer, laughing.
“Haven’t I told you that there never are lions here? only an occasional man of
      genius, shipped over fresh, between petroleum tins and sewing‐machines, from America, may
      stray in in top‐boots and a red flannel shirt—or it so happens that a beautiful woman is first
      noticed here—or Victor Hugo walks in
       quite casually to tea—or the ghost of Byron mistakes this for
      Westminster Abbey. Oh, no lions, never. Besides, here is Monsieur Gosselin, and
      here is Mademoiselle Meringue and Madame Gauffre just come in. You see, Miss Brown, how
      perfectly true it is that we are to meet them. They are taking their place behind the piano.
      Yes, that is Madame Gauffre with the diamond butterfly. You perceive how we are to have the
      pleasure of making their acquaintance. Do you remark the vacant space round the piano? Miss
      Euphrosyne Argiropoulo and her sister are alone privileged to enter it, and the waiters also,
      to talk to Monsieur Gosselin and his fair comrades, and offer them refreshments. It is what I
      call a moral cordon sanitaire, separating these artistes from the highly respectable company all round.”
“How horrible!” said Anne; “and do they pay them to be insulted like that?”
“Pay them? oh, never. The Argiropoulos are far too delicate for that. Monsieur
       Gosselin and mesdames of the comedy are intimate friends of
      the house: they have been dining here, and they are so kind as to recite a piece or two to Mrs
      Argiropoulo’s guests. Let me see—what’s he going to recite—ah—‘Un Beignet.’ That will be
      delicious.”
Gosselin had come forward, his opera‐hat in his hand, and begun to recite. It was a very
      delightful performance, and Anne enjoyed it greatly. Besides, it was a great relief to find
      that this entertainment was a performance, and not as she had dreaded, a series of
      introductions and conversations with celebrities. There was a dead silence during Gosselin’s
      recitation, except near the door, where people kept pressing in and out. When he had ceased,
      Anne looked round. She was surprised at the aspect of many of the company. They had evidently
      not been listening at all, but looking about, straining to see some one in the front rows. In
      a minute the little gangway leading to the piano was crowded.
Posthlethwaite, whom she had met several times before, was elbowing his unwieldy person—a
      Japanese lily bobbing out of the button‐hole of his ancestral dress‐coat—towards her. He had
      scarcely begun a description of a picture which he had just seen, representing “Aphrodite
      tripping with pink little feet across the dimpled sea sands,” when Mrs Argiropoulo came up
      with several gentlemen about her, whom she began rapidly to introduce to Anne: two of them
      were famous painters; one a well‐known sculptor; another was an aristocratic drawing‐room
      novelist; the fifth a man of fashion. They all stood in the gangway around Anne’s chair, while
      Posthlethwaite, who was not the person to be ousted, propped his elephantine person against
      the end of the piano, and leaning down his flabby flat‐cheeked face and mop of tow, continued
      conversing with Miss Brown, regardless of the new‐comers, who exchanged smiles as they
      listened to him with much more amused attention than they had listened to
       Gosselin. Anne was very bewildered; and as she answered the
      remarks of the party surrounding her, she became aware that the people behind were all looking
      in her direction—looking, doubtless, at Gosselin and his ladies behind the piano, or at
      Posthlethwaite. For a moment Anne turned round, wondering whether she should see Hamlin. But
      instead of Hamlin, her eyes met a face as familiar as his—a dark, rather snub face, with bushy
      black beard and hair, which emerged high above the heads of a knot of literary and political
      celebrities. She started imperceptibly, but turned away, and looked towards the piano, where
      Madame Gauffre had begun to recite, her plump little black figure standing out against the
      moonlight flooding through the window, in strange contrast to the yellow light of the room, in
      which dimly loomed the tops of trees and the towers of Westminster. Could it be her cousin
      Dick? Anne rarely mistook people’s faces, and least of all was it possible for her to mistake
       Richard Brown’s, though she had not seen him since that
      morning in Florence. But what should Richard be doing here, in this fashionable party? It was
      evidently a mere accidental resemblance, but it brought up a painful train of thought. Anne
      had once or twice written to her cousin and guardian from school, in a formal cold way, and he
      had let her know that he had become a partner in the military foundry, and had changed his
      address. She had got a vague idea that he was now rich. But she had not yet let him know of
      her arrival in England, and she felt ungrateful and rather ashamed, for, after all, he had
      always wished her well, and had been her playfellow. If he should have thought that she was
      ashamed of him? Heaven knows that was not her feeling, but she felt against Richard Brown a
      vague, instinctive aversion, as to something insulting and degrading to herself. She
      determined, however, to write to him the very next day.
With a shrill exclamation and a pert curtsy,
       Madame Gauffre, who was reciting the part of a schoolgirl of
      fifteen, suddenly came to an end.
“How do you do, Annie?” said a voice behind her.
She turned round. It was Richard Brown.
“I saw you as soon as I came in,” he said, calmly pushing aside the astonished
      Posthlethwaite, “but I have only now been able to make my way here. How do you like Madame
      Gauffre? don’t you think she’s delightful? or rather, I ought to ask, how do you like
      London?”
The voice was always that same deep one, which, when lowered to a whisper, had something
      curiously hot and passionate about it; but the accent and the easy worldly manner seemed as if
      they could not belong to Richard Brown.
“Who the deuce is that fellow?” asked Posthlethwaite angrily of Mrs Spencer.
“I don’t know—I’ve never seen him. Do you know, Mr O’Reilly, who that big black
      man is, that has just come up to Miss Brown. Not one of our set, that’s
      certain.”
“Oh Lord, no!” answered the little journalist. “You don’t read newspapers in your set, do
      you?”
“We always read the ‘Athenæum,’” answered Mrs Spencer, seriously.
“Newspapers are Cimmerian inventions,” said Posthlethwaite. “I’m a republican, red,
      incarnadine, a démocrate for Robespierre; but I never take
      up a paper, except to see which of my friends have left town.”
Thaddy O’Reilly laughed. “Oh, well, you won’t find Education Brown in the ‘Athenæum,’ Mrs
      Spencer—a mere barbarian, Goth, Philistine, but well known in Philistia. He’s a tremendous
      Radical, goes in for disestablishment, secular teaching; an awful fellow for obligatory
      education and paupers; he’ll be in Parliament some day soon, for he’s backed by all the black
      trade.”
“Surely it is very easy to feed paupers, as people used to, don’t you know, in Chaucer?”
      said Mrs Spencer, simply and seriously.
Young O’Reilly went into an inaudible but convulsive giggle.
“Anyhow, that’s Brown—‘Peace by Expensive Warfare Brown’ we call him. Look at him; he’s a
      force in his world, as your father is in yours.”
“I wish he’d keep in his own coal‐cinders,” retorted Posthlethwaite. “What business has he
      to talk to—”
“By Jove!” exclaimed O’Reilly, “it never struck me,—Anne Brown—Richard Brown,—perhaps
      they’re relations!”
“What do you think of her?” whispered Mrs Argiropoulo to the little knot of artists whom she
      had assembled.
Posthlethwaite, as usual, answered for the company.
“’Tis the body of a goddess; we must give it the soul of a woman.”
“That’s Hamlin’s look‐out,” answered Paints, the R.A.
“Why, what’s become of him?” they all asked. “Surely he was to be here.”
“Oh, be sure he’s lurking around here,” answered O’Reilly; “of course he keeps in the
      background—enjoys his triumph from afar. You don’t sit in front of your own picture on the
      first Academy day, do you, Paints?”
“Mr Posthlethwaite, will you take Miss Brown in to supper?” cried Mrs Argiropoulo, who was
      working up and down the crowd.
Richard Brown had already given Anne his arm.
“That can’t be,” cried Mrs Argiropoulo. “Mr Posthlethwaite must take you in,
      dear. Dear Mr Brown, will you take in my daughter?”
“Good‐bye, Annie,” whispered Richard Brown. “I will come and see you to‐morrow.” And he let
      his cousin be borne away in triumph by Posthlethwaite.
“Of course, Mr Posthlethwaite must take in Miss Brown,” explained Mrs Argiropoulo to Mrs
      Spencer; “he’s the most conspicuous man, after all; and, as it were, it stamps her at once. By
      the way, two R.A.’s, Paints and
       Smeers, have already said that they would like to paint
      her.”
“Walter Hamlin will never let her be painted by an R.A.,” answered Mrs Spencer, fiercely;
      “and Annie has far too much artistic feeling to endure such a thing. Why, Mr Bones has been
      drawing her for the last week, and papa made a crayon of her.”
As Anne passed through the crowd on Posthlethwaite’s arm every one turned to look at her.
      And then it suddenly flashed upon her that she was the person people had been staring at,
       she was the lion of the evening—she, the servant whom the great poet‐painter had
      adopted. Every one was looking at her; she felt horribly alone, numb, unreal.
At that moment Hamlin came up.
“Have you amused yourself?” he asked. “Why, what’s the matter? do you feel ill?”
“Only very tired. Oh, why didn’t you turn up before?” Anne’s voice was so wretched and
      supplicating that Hamlin felt quite terrified.
“Where’s Mrs Spencer?” he asked. “It must be that hot room. Edith, do take Miss Brown home,
      she looks so awfully tired.”
“Permit me to take you down‐stairs,” said the mellifluous fat voice of Posthlethwaite.
“I will take Miss Brown down myself, if you please, Posthlethwaite;” and Hamlin pushed the
      prince of æsthetes roughly aside.
“Why did you not show yourself the whole evening?” asked Anne feebly, while he was helping
      her on with her cloak.
“Why—because—I thought I had no right to monopolise you always,” answered Hamlin in a
      whisper.
When the two women were alone in the brougham, Anne could stand it no longer; and leaning
      her head in the corner, she began to cry.
“Why, what’s the matter, Annie?” cried Mrs Spencer, drawing her close to her. “What’s the
      matter, my dear girl?”
“Nothing—nothing,” answered Anne, wiping her eyes. “I suppose it is because I am so
      worn‐out—so—”
“It’s that vile, ostentatious party,” replied the little woman, half in consolation, half in
      pride—“mere stupid crushes—no real society, as we have it. And I do think it
       is so disgusting of Mrs Argiropoulo to make all the people stare at you as if
      you were a burlesque actress. Oh, I know that set of lion‐hunting, purse‐proud, would‐be
      artistic people. They would have your photograph in all the shop‐windows at once, and Royal
      Highnesses to meet you. Papa and I always wonder that Walter hasn’t cut all those horrid
      sycophants before. You know that it’s only artists and poets of our school who will ever
      appreciate you really, although the others would hawk you about as a sort of professional
      beauty.”
THE sudden discovery that she was the standard beauty of the most prominent
      artistic set, and accepted as such by the rest of society, would have greatly disturbed almost
      any woman. But Anne Brown’s nature was too completely homogeneous—too completely without the
      innumerable strata, and abysses, and peaks, and winding ways of modern women’s characters—for
      her to experience any of the mixed feelings of pride, and disgust, and humiliation, and
      general uncomfortablehess which would have been the lot of a more complex nature. The atoms of
      her character were not easily shaken into new patterns: it was coherent, and, like most
      coherent things, difficult to upset, slow to move, and quick to settle down.
After the first shock of surprise, she resigned herself, without doubts, or diffidence, or
      elation, to her new place. That she was more beautiful than other women had indeed never
      occurred to her before; but once that it had been proved to her she accepted it as a fact, as
      she had accepted as a fact the still stranger news that Hamlin had singled her out to change
      her life and love her. She did not take it at all as a merit or any other exciting thing in
      herself: the only effect which it had upon her was to strengthen a curious feeling,
      constitutional in her, and resulting probably from the very coherence and weightiness of her
      character, that she was fated to be or do something different from other women—a sort of sense
      of tragic passiveness, which always formed the background of her happiness. Moreover, the
      discovery which she had made at Mrs Argiropoulo’s somehow made Anne’s position more
      intelligible and simple to herself. She had heard of other men who had educated and married
      girls of the lower orders on account
       of their beauty. Hamlin’s behaviour was now no longer a
      mystery to her; and the absence of mystery served merely, to Anne’s quite unromantic,
      practically passionate, half‐southern temper, to make Hamlin’s nobleness and goodness more
      obvious to her. She had the curious Italian capacity for feeling an ideal passion—a passion
      which was merely a sublimated form of friendship and admiration—for a real personality; and
      her instinctive desire was merely to get nearer that real personality. But much as she tried,
      the reality of Hamlin seemed to escape and baffle her: he was a complex man, and she a
      homogeneous woman; and as she could not see Hamlin well in detail, she loved him in the very
      simple and broad outlines which she was able to comprehend.
Now that she had settled down in æsthetic society, and found her place, and got to
      understand the main points of things, she was quite ideally happy. Her life was very full, and
      was surrounded by a flood of love,—on her side or on Hamlin’s? She scarcely knew; but she
       knew that she was happy. By this time the round of
      sight‐seeing, play‐going, excursions, and introductions, was over; her life had subsided into
      the normal. Its object, she felt, as one feels a wholesome and agreeable desire for food or
      sleep, was to make herself as worthy as possible of Hamlin, or rather to let him find in her
      the best possible bargain. She worked very hard at all the things which the school had left
      incomplete,—at what, living in that æsthetic society, seemed to her the solid requisites of
      life. She read history and biography and poetry, with the determination with which other
      girls, anticipating marriage, might study manuals of domestic economy; and she worked at
      developing her taste in art and music as others might have practised cooking or dressmaking;
      for these were the things which would be requisite in Hamlin’s spiritual household. The people
      around her, the men and women of Hamlin’s set, seemed to her as necessary, as inevitable, as
      normal as the trees and houses all round. Some of them
       she liked, and some she disliked; but their ideas, though
      sometimes absurd caricatures, and their tempers, though often intolerable, seemed to Anne
      quite natural and proper in the main, though rendered ridiculous or disagreeable in
      individuals. Indeed she got rather to believe in imperfect individuals,—being thus constantly
      either made cross by the touchiness, the morbidness, the disgusting fleshliness, the
      intolerance of the æsthetes around her, or made to laugh by their affectations, their vanity,
      their inconsistency, their grotesque manias of wickedness and mysticism—while unable to judge
      or condemn the general, intellectual, and moral condition of which these individual
      excrescences were the result.
Some of the people were distinctly repulsive, or distinctly boring, or distinctly annoying
      to her; others, like Mrs Spencer and her father and mother and sisters, decidedly lovable;
      others, like little Chough, decidedly amusing and amiable: and she took them as they came, but
      with the indifference of concentrated
       feeling; for what did it matter whether she cared for them,
      or they cared for her, as long as she was doing her best to deserve Hamlin?
Meanwhile Anne Brown read quantities of medieval and Elizabethan literature; went with
      Hamlin to see pictures and hear music; studied Dante and Shakespeare—the algebra and
      arithmetic, so to speak, of the æsthetic set—and even began, secretly, to work at a Greek
      grammar. Twice a‐week Cosmo Chough came to practise her accompaniments with her; and twice
      a‐week also, of an evening, friends dropped in at the house at Hammersmith, when Mrs Macgregor
      would leave her nephew and niece, as she called her, to entertain the guests. On other
      evenings Anne would usually go to the house of one of the set, where literature and art, and
      the faults of friends, and the wrong‐headedness of the public, were largely discussed; music
      was made, young long‐haired Germans on the loose performing; and poets, especially the
       inexhaustible Chough, would recite their compositions,
      perched on the arms of sofas, or stretched on the hearth‐rug; while the ladies went to sleep,
      or pretended to do so, over the descriptions of the kisses of cruel, blossom‐mouthed women,
      who sucked out their lovers’ hearts, bit their lips, and strewed their apartments with
      coral‐like drops of blood. Most of these poets, as Anne speedily discovered, were young men of
      harmless lives, and altogether unacquainted with the beautiful, baleful ladies they
      represented as sucking at their vitals; and none was more utterly harmless than Cosmo Chough.
      Instead of the terrible Faustinas, Messalinas, and Lucretia Borgias to whom his poems were
      addressed, the poor little man had in his miserable home in the north of London a wife older
      than himself, often bedridden and always half crazy, who turned the house in a sort of
      disorderly litter, neglected her children, and vented on her husband the most jealous and
      perverse temper; but the victim of Venus, as he styled himself,
       nursed her with absolute devotion, denied himself every
      gratification to allow her a servant and send his children to school, and made all new‐comers
      believe that Mrs Cosmo Chough was the most angelic invalid that the world had ever seen.
      People in the set had got accustomed to this fact, and treated Chough merely as an amusing
      little caricature of genius; but when Anne understood the real state of the case, she was
      deeply touched, and possessed with a violent desire to help the little man. He could not,
      indeed, restrain his habit of alluding in pompous language to Phryne, Pasiphaë, La Belle
      Heaulmière, Madame du Barry, and all the most celebrated improprieties of all times and
      nations; nor from discussing the most striking literary obscenities, from Petronius to Walt
      Whitman. But although at first surprised (as every one was surprised and indeed shocked) by
      Anne’s unblushing and quietly resolute—“I think you had better leave that subject alone, Mr
      Chough”—he became quite devoted to Anne.
       When he gave a set of lectures, in Mrs Spencer’s house, on
      what was nominally Elizabethan drama, but virtually the unmentionable play of Ford, and the
      ladies dropped off one by one and merely laughed at poor Cosmo’s eccentricities, Anne had the
      courage to sit out the performance, and to tell Chough openly that he ought to be ashamed of
      himself for holding forth on such subjects—a proceeding which made Hamlin’s friends blame Miss
      Brown for want of womanly feeling and prudishness alike; and which put Hamlin just a little
      out of temper, until she answered his unspoken censure by remarking, with a sort of Italian
      bluntness and seriousness, that a woman of her age had no business not to understand the real
      meaning of such things, and understanding them, not to let the poets know that she would not
      tolerate them.
“You see, it enters into their artistic effects,” explained Mrs Spencer. “I don’t like such
      things personally, but of course everything is legitimate in art.”
“They may be legitimate in art,” answered Anne, sceptically, “but they shan’t be legitimate
      in my presence.”
To return to Chough. Anne gradually became the confidant of the domestic difficulties,
      though not of the domestic shame, of the little poet; and to every one’s great astonishment,
      she obtained Hamlin’s permission to have one of Chough’s little girls at Hammersmith every
      Saturday till Monday, and tried to instil into the miserable puny imps some notion of how to
      behave and how to amuse themselves.
“You are not going to take that child out in the carriage with you, surely?” asked Hamlin,
      the first Sunday that Maggy Chough spent at Hammersmith.
“Of course I am,” answered Anne. “She’s the daughter of your most intimate friend; surely
      you can’t grudge the poor little thing some amusement. And I want you to go with us to the
      Zoo, Mr Hamlin. I’m sure it’s much more fascinating than the Grosvenor or the Elgin
      rooms.”
Hamlin smiled; and next day made a crayon drawing of Anne, one of the dozens in his studio,
      with Chough’s child; but he managed to make Anne look mournfully mysterious, and the child
      haggard and wild, so that people thought it represented Medea and one of the children of
      Jason.
So far Anne’s acquaintance were entirely limited to the æsthetic set; but there were two
      exceptions. One was a couple of sisters, Mary and Marjory Leigh, who existed as it were on the
      borderland—Mary Leigh being a sort of amateur painter with strong literary proclivities; the
      other was Richard Brown, who, after the meeting at Mrs Argiropoulo’s, called at Hammersmith,
      was politely received by Hamlin, with whom he appeared quite reconciled, and talked on a
      variety of indifferent subjects, as if Anne Brown had never been his ward. Hamlin had
      apparently never appeared to him in the light of a slave‐buyer and seducer, and all parties
      had apparently never been in any save their present position. Anne
       asked her cousin to one or two of their evenings: he came,
      seemed to know one or two people slightly, and although professing profound ignorance of art,
      managed to interest one or two of the æsthetic brotherhood by developing his views on the
      necessity of extending artistic training to the lower classes.
“He isn’t at all a stupid man, that cousin of yours,” remarked little Mrs Spencer; “and I do
      think he is so right in wishing to give poor people a taste of beauty.”
“I’m sure we are most of us poor people, and don’t always get a taste of
      anything else, Edith,” cried her father, the veteran painter in tempera, who was a fearful
      punster.
“Oh papa, you know what I mean; and I’m sure art will gain ever so much. It’s only what Mr
      Ruskin has said over and over again, and Mr Morris is always talking about.”
“Any one is free to give the lower classes that taste of beauty, as long as I
      am not required to see or speak to the noble workmen,” said Hamlin. “I hate all that
      democratic bosh.”
“Oh, I know, Watty; your ancestors kept negroes, and you would like to have negroes
      yourself,” said Mrs Spencer, hotly.
“Heaven forbid! I only ask to be left alone, my dear Edith, especially by reformers.”
At any rate, Richard Brown was permitted to show himself sometimes in æsthetic company. But
      Richard Brown did not avail himself much of the condescending permission to improve his mind;
      and neither at her own house (for people always spoke of Miss Brown’s house now) nor at the
      houses of any of her friends would Anne have had much opportunity of seeing her cousin, had he
      not, by a curious chance, been a frequent visitor at the house of the Leigh girls.
Mary Leigh was, as already said, a demi‐semi‐æsthete; she had studied art in an irregular,
      Irish sort of way, and she had a literary, romantic kind of imagination, which fitted her
      rather for an illustrator than a painter. She felt the incompleteness of her own endowment, in
      a gentle, half‐humorous,
       half‐sad way; and the incompleteness of her own life—for her
      ideal of happiness was to travel about, to live in Italy, and this she had cheerfully
      sacrificed to please her sister, whose only interests in life were school boards, and
      depauperisation, and (it must be admitted) a mild amount of flirtation with young men of
      scientific and humanitarian tendencies. Between the sisters there was perfect love, but not
      perfect understanding; and Mary Leigh, who felt a little lonely, a little shut into herself by
      her younger sister, who was at once a philosopher and a baby in her eyes, vented her
      imaginative and artistic cravings in a passionate admiration for Hamlin’s strange and
      beautiful ward or fiancée, a kind of intellectual fervour
      which Anne was as remarkable for inspiring as she seemed unable to inspire either ordinary
      liking or ordinary love: and as Mary Leigh likewise adored Hamlin, and Hamlin in return
      thought Mary Leigh a nice sort of girl, Anne Brown did what visiting and sight‐seeing and
      shopping was left to her
       almost always in Mary Leigh’s company. Now, if Anne was the
      idol of the æsthetic Mary, the humanitarian and practical younger sister, who, with the
      cut‐and‐dry decision of a philosopher of twenty‐two, looked upon æsthetics and æsthetes as
      somewhat pestilent in nature, had her idol also in a very different person, and this was no
      other than Richard Brown, to be whose lieutenant in some of his philanthropical and
      educational schemes was Marjory’s highest ambition. Richard Brown had, ever since meeting his
      cousin at Mrs Argiropoulo’s in the character of an artistic beauty, made up his mind that Anne
      was no concern of his, and was luckily disposed of in the æsthetic set; and for some time he
      almost took a pleasure in making her understand, whenever he met her at the Leighs’ house in
      Chelsea, that he did not in the least expect her to take an interest, or pretend
      to take an interest, in the plans which he discussed with Marjory Leigh. Anne on the other
      hand, imbued with Hamlin’s and
       Chough’s theory that all attempts at improving the world
      result merely in failure, and that the only wise occupation of a noble mind is to make for
      itself a paradise of beautiful thoughts and forms and emotions, was extremely sceptical of her
      cousin’s and Marjory’s schemes, and once or twice declared her disbelief with perfect
      openness.
Richard Brown was at first annoyed, then amused, then indignant; and then, seeing how
      completely Anne’s ideas were borrowed from her set, and also how completely unsuitable they
      were to her downright, serious, and practical nature, he determined, not without vanity
      playing a part as well as conviction, to “let a little light,” as he expressed it, into her
      mind.
There had been recently founded, by some friends of his, a kind of club where girls of the
      dressmaker’s apprentice and shopwomen class might spend their leisure moments in reading and
      meeting each other; which club, besides a library and reading‐room, offered
       to its members a certain number of classes or sets of
      lectures on various subjects, delivered at a nominal price, after work hours.
The lecturers or teachers were nearly all young ladies: Marjory Leigh had for some time
      lectured on sanitary arrangements (this being her especial hobby), and Mary Leigh was going to
      set up a drawing‐class.
Anne Brown, practical by nature and æsthetically sceptical by training, had no very great
      belief in the famous club; she had been told so often that mankind is too stupid and degraded
      to be helped, that she had almost got to believe it. But she let herself be taken one evening
      to a lecture, at what she called Marjory’s college. The lecture was just beginning as they
      entered the little, white‐washed, bare room up innumerable stairs. Four or five young women,
      decently dressed, were seated at desks, copy‐books and ink‐stands before them; and a beautiful
      little girl, who had been pointed out to Anne in æsthetic circles as a rising poetess, was
      seated opposite
       them at the end of a table. The Leighs and Anne sat down
      silently near the door, and the lecture began. It was on modern history. The pupils listened
      with the greatest attention, their pens flying on their copy‐books. The lecturer, a small,
      graceful, extremely frail little creature, began in a somewhat tremulous voice; then
      gradually, as she got more excited, became more voluble, excited, and absolutely eloquent.
“She is too delicate for such work,” whispered Marjory, “but she will do it.”
Anne listened. But she did not follow the lecturer’s argument very closely. She thought what
      these girls were, what the drudgery of their work, the temptations of their leisure, the
      hopeless narrowness of their horizon; and she thought also, the thought throbbing on almost
      like dull pain, what it would have been for her, when she also was alone in the world—when she
      had drudgery on the one hand and temptation on the other—when her whole nature had been
      parched and withered for want of a few words that should speak of
       higher and nobler things,—had she been permitted, once
      a‐week, to come to such a place, to hear about such subjects, to be spoken to by such an
      earnest and enthusiastic and exquisite creature as this. At the end of the lecture the girls
      crowded shyly round the lecturer, some to beg her to explain a point, others to ask for books
      on the subject, all of them to thank with pathetic earnestness. Then they went away, and the
      Leigh girls came forward to the lecturer. From where she sat she could not see the new‐comers;
      and she was astonished, and in a way awe‐stricken, on seeing Anne Brown, the exotic beauty of
      whom she had heard so much, whose portrait she had seen in so many studios, and to whom she
      had been introduced almost in fear and trembling, for Anne had a kind of awe‐inspiring
      fascination for imaginative people. Anne, on the other hand, was silent and depressed, and the
      little poetess must have made up her mind that this magnificent and sombre creature was as
      sullen and lethargic and haughty as one of
       Michelangelo’s goddesses. But in reality Miss Brown could
      have laid her head on one of the desks and cried like a child.
When, the following day, Mary Leigh came to take her out for a walk, Anne looked as if she
      had received bad news, or as if she had bad news to communicate. She answered only in
      monosyllables; until, as they were looking in at a shop window, she suddenly turned to her
      companion.
“Do you think,” she said hesitatingly, “that I might perhaps—teach something at Marjory’s
      college?”
“Teach!” exclaimed Mary Leigh in astonishment; “you teach! Why, what would you teach, Anne
      dear?”
Anne was silent. She sighed. “That’s just what I have been thinking all the morning—I
      fear—but you see I do so want to teach something. You see, that little poet‐girl
      gives up her time to it, and she was born a lady, and doesn’t know—can’t know—all the good she
      is doing. While I—”
Mary Leigh squeezed her hand.
“We will ask your cousin,” she said.
“Oh no, not Dick—don’t mention it to Dick,” answered Anne; “he is sure to make difficulties
      and laugh at me—he thinks me a useless thing.”
“You a useless thing!” replied the enthusiastic Irish girl looking at her
      companion. “Why, then—then all the Titians in the gallery, and the Elgin marbles, and all
      Keats, and all Shelley, and Beethoven, and Mozart, must be useless also.”
Anne sighed. “All those things didn’t make themselves,” she answered. “It’s the artists who
      were useful and whom we have to thank.”
The other Miss Leigh was immensely astonished, and, with her youthful intolerance, rather
      indignant at Anne’s suggestion.
“I think,” said Anne, hesitatingly, “that I could, with a little work, manage medieval
      literature—at least medieval lyrics.”
Marjory shook her head. “There’s too much of that sort of thing already,” she
       said. “Every one wants to teach literature. Where’s the use
      of telling them about a parcel of Provençal and old French and German and Italian people, when
      they don’t yet know the difference between Voltaire and Molière, and Goethe and Frau von
      Hillern?”
“That’s true,” Anne said sadly.
Marjory was rather sorry for her rough practicalness, but at the same time she had a blind
      impulse to harass an æsthete.
“Political economy is what we want most,” she said; and, as the door opened and Richard
      Brown entered, she went on—
“Isn’t it true that political economy is what we want most at the college, Mr Brown?”
“Yes,” answered Richard. “How are you, Miss Leigh?—how are you, Annie? What about it?”
“Oh, only that your cousin wants to teach at the college, and I tell her that literature is
      no use, and that political economy is what we want.”
“You want to teach, Annie?” cried Brown,
       and his face assumed that look of somewhat brutal contempt
      hidden under suavity of manner, which Anne hated so much. “You want to teach? How dull
      æsthetic society must be getting, to be sure!”
“I am not dull, Dick,” answered Anne, sternly; “but it struck me that, having been a poor
      girl without education myself—until” (and she looked her cousin reproachfully in the face) “Mr
      Hamlin had me taught—I have an obligation to help other girls like what I was, greater than
      the obligation of people who have always been educated. I daresay there may be nothing that I
       can teach; but there is no reason to laugh at me.”
“Laugh at you!” cried Brown. “Oh, not in the least! I was only smiling at the cool way in
      which you absolve those who are born in fortunate circumstances from the obligation which you
      yourself feel.”
“I don’t think that’s quite true, Dick,” answered Anne, simply. “You think it’s absurd on my
      part, and I knew you would,
       because you think me frivolous and artistic.”
“Well,” said Brown, evidently surprised at her manner, and looking searchingly in her pale,
      strange‐featured face, “what do you think you might teach?”—his voice was much gentler.
“At present”—Anne’s voice sank, for she felt the uselessness of her offer—“I can think only
      of medieval literature” (Brown smiled); “but perhaps, if there were something else, I might
      get it up.”
“I’m sure there won’t be a vacancy for anything except political economy,” interrupted
      Marjory Leigh, impatiently. “I’m quite positive, from what the secretary told me, all the rest
      is glutted.”
“I fear it is the case,” mused Brown. “There has been a talk of teaching singing,—in which
      case, perhaps—”
“I don’t sing well enough,” said Anne, haughtily. Why was she always having her æstheticism
      thrust in her face?
“Besides,” added her cousin, “it’s extremely improbable.”
They fell to talking of other things. As Brown was leaving, Anne stopped him.
“Tell me,” she said, “what are the best books to begin learning political economy?”
Brown smiled. “Why? Do you want to teach it?”
“Since it is such an important thing,” answered Anne, gravely, “I think I should like to
      learn it.”
“It’s not amusing, Annie.”
“It can’t be duller than Minnesingers—and nothing is dull when one is learning it. Can’t you
      tell me of some books?”
Brown looked at her with a puzzled expression. “I have written a primer of it myself,” he
      said—“I will send it you; and if you get through that, you will find at the end a list of
      text‐books, some of which I can lend you to take into—”
“Thank you, Dick. I shall be much obliged to you.”
“You shall have it this evening. Goodbye, Annie, and felici
       studj, as you Italians say.” He laughed, and went away.
“You’ll find it tough work,” remarked Marjory, shaking her short mane of hair out before the
      glass; “but, of course, a primer is never very difficult.”
WHEN Mrs Macgregor had gone up‐stairs to rest before dinner on their arrival at
      Wotton Hall, Hamlin took Miss Brown round the huge, deserted‐looking house, which his
      grandfather had built on returning from Jamaica. It was like an Italian villa, with vaulted
      rooms, gilded and stuccoed, marble floors, and terraced windows; the furniture was all of the
      Napoleonic period; nothing could be more dignified or sadder.
When Hamlin had shown her the large drawing‐rooms, the library, the room which had been the
      play‐room when he was a child, he took Anne into the large Palladian hall, and showed her the
      innumerable portraits of ladies and gentlemen in armour, and ruffs,
       and bobwigs, and powder, hanging all round—his ancestors
      ever since his family had left England in the civil wars.
Anne looked at them shyly. They were mostly indifferently painted and vapid—affected, like
      all old portraits by mediocre painters; but it seemed to her that in most of these gentlemen,
      with peaked beards on their Vandyck lace, or horse‐hair wigs, or carefully powdered hair tied
      back in silk bags, she could recognise a resemblance to the man by her side—the same delicate,
      handsome features, the same fair, almost beardless complexion, the same gentle, melancholy,
      slightly ironical expression: and never did the real meaning of Hamlin’s marriage with her
      come clearer before her mind than when, in that silent hall, surrounded by all those portraits
      of his ancestors, she suddenly saw herself and him reflected in one of the long dim mirrors;
      she, so tall and strong, so powerful of bone and muscle, with her strange, half‐southern,
      half‐Jewish, and
       almost half‐Ethiopian beauty, by the side of that slight,
      fair, pale, aristocratic man, with features sharp like those of a high‐bred race‐horse,
      nervous and wistful and dreamy, as if he were tired of his family having lasted so long.
“They all married and intermarried for nearly a century,” said Hamlin, “that’s why they’re
      all so like each other. I often wonder why it didn’t end in insanity—you see it has ended in a
      poet at last. My mother was the first woman married by a Hamlin for eighty years who was not
      at least a second cousin,—in those islands there were very few decent people, you see. Don’t
      they all look dapper and respectable? It appears they were not. That man in the corselet was
      killed in a duel about another man’s wife. That one in the middle, the boy in the grey dress
      with the powdered hair, Sir Thomas Hamlin, they used to call the bad Sir Thomas, because he
      amused himself practising pistol‐shooting on black people, whom he had put all round his yard;
       he was a very fine gentleman, they say, and would go out
      only in the evening on account of his complexion. The one who looks like a woman, with the
      open shirt‐collar and the long hair, was my great‐uncle, Mordaunt Hamlin, who supposed himself
      to be a poet, somewhere in the first years of this century; he was an opium‐eater, and did
      some horribly disgraceful things, I don’t exactly know what, and was poisoned, they say, by
      some low woman, because she was tired of him. My father had his portrait removed; but I used
      to see it in the lumber‐room when I was a child, and thought him very handsome and eery; and
      when I came of age, I had it brought down, because I think he’s far better‐looking and more
      interesting than any of the respectable ones. Then he was a poet also, you see, and Cosmo
      Chough pretends I’m like him. Do you think so, Miss Brown?”
“No,” said Anne, laughing, as she looked at Hamlin, at that noble and delicate face, which
      seemed to her the noblest and most beautiful
       in the world; and yet, when she looked at Mordaunt Hamlin
      again, with his morbid woman’s face and his effeminate bare throat, she could not help feeling
      a certain disgust at the thought that perhaps—perhaps— Hamlin was just a little
      like him.
“That’s my mother,” said Hamlin, pointing to a faded crayon of a beautiful, gentle,
      pathetic‐looking woman.
“That is like you,” cried Anne, delighted. “That is very like you—like your
      expression. I was wondering where you got your expression from among all your Jamaica
      ancestors.”
“I’m glad you think so. She was a very beautiful woman, and very brave and noble, and not
      very happy, poor mamma.”
“Did you know her?”
“Only till I was about twelve; she died young. That is grandpapa; and that is my uncle
      Arnold,—he died young too—in fact, drank himself to death. Don’t you think he is like Mordaunt
      Hamlin? That’s papa;”
       and Hamlin stopped before the full‐length of a handsome
      effeminate man.
“You wouldn’t think that he was a very violent man, would you?” he said.
“No,” answered Anne, looking at that weak, worn, rather blear face, and thinking how her
      father, too, had been a drunkard; but how different had been the drunkenness of the poor
      overworked mechanic, so industrious and gentle and high‐spirited when he was sober, from the
      sort of emasculating vice of Mordaunt and Arnold Hamlin, of Walter Hamlin’s bad‐faced
      father!
“It’s very curious,” pursued Hamlin, with a sort of psychological interest in his own
      family, “how that Mordaunt, who, after all, was no ancestor of mine, tries everywhere to
      perpetuate himself. There’s unfortunately no portrait of my great‐grandfather, or perhaps we
      might understand it; but perhaps it came from the mother. It’s curious I have never felt any
      inclination to drink—I mean, however moderately; but I can’t take
       any wine at all—it makes me drunk at once.”
“I never have seen you take any wine, by the way,” said Anne.
“I tried opium once; but Chough made me give it up. It’s sad to be denied any sort of unreal
      pleasures, don’t you think? That’s my brother and I when we were boys.”
Anne stopped to look at the picture.
It was very well painted, though a trifle old‐fashioned. The two boys were represented in
      shooting‐jackets, with guns and dogs. The shorter, slighter, and paler boy was evidently
      Walter Hamlin; the other was more robust, boyish, and ordinary‐looking.
“Your brother died when he was a child, did he not?”
“Oh no,” answered Hamlin, quickly. “Poor Arnold—was very fond of shooting—I hated it; but
      papa had the picture painted on his account; he was the favourite at first, being
      younger.”
It seemed to Anne that Hamlin was going
       to say something different from what he had said. What had
      become of Arnold Hamlin? Mrs Macgregor’s allusions to him, who had evidently been her
      favourite nephew, always seemed to point to a melancholy end.
“It’s curious,” said Hamlin, after a moment. “Arnold looked so jolly and strong when he was
      a child; and yet, later, he got such a look of our grand‐uncle Mordaunt.”
“I think you have your grand‐uncle on the brain,” said Anne, trying to break through
      Hamlin’s strange mood.
They left the hall, and went to the window of the large drawing‐room, and looked out on the
      reddening beeches and the grass, permitted to grow high and thick, in the yellow sunlight.
“I shall sell this place most likely soon,” said Hamlin; “I’ve already had some offers for
      it. It’s too large, and pompous, and characterless for me. I should like a real old
      country‐house, two or three centuries old, with flower‐gardens and panelled rooms,—not this
      plaster and stucco and romantic gardening.
       Besides, I hate this place—have hated it ever since I was a
      child.”
Anne did not answer.
“I hate this place,” went on Hamlin, leaning on the window‐sill by Anne’s side, “and that is
      the reason why I have brought you here. Before saying farewell to it for good and all, I wish
      to save it from being a mere hateful recollection in my life. I wish to be able to think of it
      in connection with you;” and he looked up at Anne, who was leaning against the tall French
      window.
“I don’t know,” went on Hamlin, again looking out at the vaporous yellow sunset horizon— “I
      don’t know what are destined to be the relations between our lives. You have seen too little
      of the world as yet to be able to know yourself and me; and I am more and more decided to
      abide by my original plan of giving ourselves time to understand each other, and to understand
      whether we are made for one another. . . .”
He looked at Anne; she had turned an ashy‐white as she listened; she had thought
       that Hamlin loved her, and now . . . He noticed it, and
      understood, but pretended not to understand; he enjoyed playing upon a living soul, all the
      more upon a soul like this one, slow to respond to his touch, with low and long‐sustained
      vibrations, like those of some deep‐toned instrument.
“Don’t take what I say in bad part,” he went on, conscious to himself that he was speaking
      the truth, and at the same time that he was acting, telling it at a moment and in a manner
      which made it untruthful; “and don’t think that I mean anything horrid against you or against
      myself, when I say that you don’t yet know me, and will not know me, perhaps, for some time.
      You see me through your own nature, your own enthusiasms, your own aspirations; you think I am
      strong where I am weak, and pure where I am impure.”
Anne shook her head.
“I don’t think so.”
Hamlin smiled sadly.
“But I do. It’s very sad to think that one
       must lose so much that is worth most in life, all one’s
      illusions, before one can approach the reality of even one’s best friends,—that even one’s
      best friends can be seen as they really are only when we have got disillusioned and
      disappointed, is it not?”
Hamlin had often said things like these in the letters which he used to write to her, and
      had hinted, much more clearly, at weaknesses and basenesses which she would some day recognise
      in him.
It could not occur to Anne, whose character was so completely of a piece, that there was any
      untruthfulness in this mode of speaking, any more than she could believe that Hamlin could be
      correct in thus speaking of himself. The sort of shimmer, as of the two tints in a shot stuff,
      of reality and unreality, of genuine and affected feeling, of moods which came spontaneously
      and of other moods, noticed, treasured up, reproduced in himself,—which existed in Hamlin,
      would be perfectly unintelligible to Anne.
“I daresay,” she answered gravely, “that you have faults, in which, at present, I cannot
      believe; but those faults are not the ones which you imagine. When a man knows himself to have
      a fault, he ceases to have it—he cures it.”
A sensation of a new experience passed through Hamlin’s mind as Anne said this: it seemed so
      strange, pathetic, grand, to him—who knew himself to be for ever mixing up the unrealities of
      his art with the realities of his life, to be continually experimenting upon himself the moods
      of his poetry—that any one should seriously think thus, should not know that when a man
      recognises in himself a fault, he may, so far from eradicating, cherish it stealthily.
“You have asked me not to be angry with you for telling me that I am inexperienced and
      cannot yet know my own mind,” said Anne; “don’t be angry and don’t laugh at me if I tell you
      that I think you don’t always know yours. I have often observed how imaginative
       you are about yourself, how apt to fancy morbid things; I
      suppose it is because poets are always turned inwards, and because you have not perhaps been
      very happy sometimes, and because”—and she looked at him half laughing, half with the tears in
      her eyes—“you are very good. I daresay I don’t know you thoroughly yet, but I know you—I know
      I know you—better sometimes than you do; because you fancy all sorts of horrid mysterious
      flaws in your character wherever there is a little inequality; and I know how good and noble
      you are, and how you are always thinking that you must be wicked.”
Hamlin did not answer. He was deeply touched, touched all the more because he knew how
      little she guessed at the self‐conscious unreality of so much of him.
“You are very comforting,” he said sadly, then went on more cheerfully: “well, what I wanted
      to say, when we began to discuss which of us knew the other better, is this,—that whatever we
      may be destined to be to
       one another in future—and this I dare not decide even in
      surmise—you will always have been to me, in these years that I have known you, in the past and
      present, an infinite source of happiness and good; a something which to have possessed, as I
      possess your friendship, will always remain, even should all the reality come to an end and
      only the recollection remain, the most precious thing in my life.” He had taken her hand, and
      playing with her strong shapely fingers, so much stronger and less delicate, though not less
      shapely than his own, looked with a kind of solemnity into her face. Anne could not answer,
      for if she did, she knew she must cry; she felt the tears, as it were, all through her nature;
      she seemed to see, she knew not why, but as a solemn certainty, that things could never go any
      further, that Hamlin was prophesying the inevitable future: and yet, in the midst of this
      quite inexplicable, unreasonable sense of loss and resignation, there was a deep happiness
      which she had never
       before felt, the happiness of the present; a something new
      to Anne, though all other lovers have felt the happiness of possession of one another, even at
      the moment of loss.
“It is getting chilly,” said Hamlin, and shut the window. “You look very pale, Miss Brown;
      had you not better put on some warmer dress this evening?”
His voice seemed like the curtain dropping after a scene, or the chord at the end of a duet.
      It was a return to reality and prose.
“Perhaps I had better, and I ought to go and see after your aunt; good‐bye for the
      present.”
Hamlin strolled out into the terrace, and lit a cigarette; the past and present, his real
      and unreal self, Anne, his brother and father, his great‐uncle Mordaunt—all went cloudily
      through his brain. He was very happy. Love to him was not what it was to other men, not what
      he had tried it himself in former years. It was romance, but romance not of ladders and
      hairbreadth escapes, but
       of psychical conditions, of spiritual sensations. He had
      written fleshly poetry and passionate poetry, but no one could be less fleshly or less
      passionate than Hamlin: the ‘Vita Nuova’—if it could be made modern, and the parts altered and
      reversed—unreal reality of love, had been his ideal, and he had got it.
They had many conversations like this one. Hamlin never so much as kissed Anne’s hand, never
      told her that he loved her, spoke merely of himself, of her, of the future and the past, of
      what she would one day know, of what he would one day feel; and Anne listened seriously,
      trying to cure him of his despondency and morbidness, trying to persuade him of his own worth
      and of her clear‐sightedness, while never a suspicion crossed her simple stern mind that all
      this earnest talk, which was so tragic and still so delightful, was the thing which she
      scornfully connected with whispers and kisses and nonsense,—in one word, love‐making.
THEY remained about a fortnight completely solitary in the large house. Hamlin was
      finishing a poem and correcting the proofs of his next volume. Anne was continuing her usual
      literary studies, but now with the addition of some books and pamphlets on political economy,
      which had been incredulously lent her by Richard Brown. The two young people had never seen so
      much of one another, and they were, Hamlin in his dreamy manner, Anne in her serious,
      practical way, very happy. Mrs Macgregor went on reading her old‐fashioned freethinking books,
      and giving out cynical remarks, which her amiable and utterly gullible character deprived of
      all weight. She was the elder and considerably
       older sister of Hamlin’s mother, and had lived in the house
      for many years as a widow. She had been twice married, each time for love, and each time to
      men who, if one might trust her nephew, had been immediately reduced by her into the most
      devoted and timid slaves; yet she always spoke of marriage as if every misfortune of her
      existence was due to it. Imbued with the pseudo‐scientific and somewhat anti‐social philosophy
      of early deism (though herself a rigid stickler for decorum), Mrs Macgregor had a way of
      talking of love and marriage which for some time had made poor Anne profoundly miserable: men
      and women, averred the old lady, were, whatever they might pretend to the contrary, entirely
      at the mercy of their animal passions,—to suppose that any one successfully resisted them was
      sheer folly; marry people must, but marriage was the most unfortunate of all necessities, the
      beginning of all unhappiness, the end of all independence, self‐respect, and pleasure in life;
      it was the long waking up from a disgraceful
       delusion; yet this disgraceful delusion, this drunken
      condition called love, was (always according to Mrs Macgregor) the one beautiful and poetical
      thing in the world.
“I don’t believe that all people are like that, Aunt Claudia,” Anne would often exclaim
      indignantly. “I don’t believe that all people marry from unworthy passion, just to wake up and
      find its unworthiness. I am sure that if love were such a vile thing, and marriage such a
      mistake, every man or woman with any self‐respect and self‐restraint would refuse both.”
“Oh, my dear child,” Mrs Macgregor would answer with a smile, “wait till you are a little
      older and see what a disgusting thing life is.”
“If it is,” answered Anne, feeling quite nauseated and terrified, and at the same time
      resolute in herself—“if it is, Aunt Claudia, it is because men and women are mostly such
      wretched, weak, silly, base, puling creatures.”
Then, when she saw Hamlin, and thought of
       the noble way in which he had acted towards her, of the calm
      and clear love and gratitude which she felt towards him,—when she thought of the things which
      they talked about together, of the desire to become worthier with which his love had inspired
      her, of the greater trust in his own worthiness which she hoped her love was instilling into
      him,—nay, when she looked at that thoughtful, delicate, almost diaphanous face of his, Anne’s
      anger towards the old lady would turn into mere pity; she would merely, in her own certainty
      of worthiness, smile at what she now considered as the mere empty talk of a disgusting school
      of thought, or, at best, as the lamentable generalisations from a horribly exceptional family,
      such as she understood, vaguely, that of Hamlin’s father to have been. And, for the rest, Anne
      believed that though people were very ridiculous, and affected, and mean in little matters
      (she was thinking of the Spencers, and the Saunders, and so many other of her æsthetic
      friends), and although they might also, like
       Cosmo Chough, make the mistake of thinking indecent things
      interesting and dramatic, the vast majority of mankind and womankind was really very pure, and
      generous, and loving at bottom. So, after a time, she listened to Mrs Macgregor’s remarks with
      only a little habitual and instinctive annoyance, but without any kind of serious belief in
      them. And when Aunt Claudia would sometimes allude to the bad lives which had been led in this
      particular house—to the vices (taking them quite as ordinary matters) of Hamlin’s grandfather
      and father and uncles, of the neglect and violence which her sister, Hamlin’s mother, had
      suffered from, hinting that, if one only knew, the self‐same things were happening in every
      other family on earth,—whenever there came any such allusions, Anne would carefully, as it
      were, close up these loopholes into a past, in which she scarcely believed and from which she
      shrank: the world seemed to her as good, and healthy, and strong, and easy to understand as
      herself. But while she did thus,
       Anne was so gentle and sympathising to Mrs Macgregor, that
      the old lady was never hurt by her contradictions; indeed she would sometimes say that, were
      she not persuaded that no law of nature can have any real exceptions, she would almost believe
      that Anne was quite different from any other woman that ever was.
It seemed somehow, here all alone in this ancestral home of Hamlin’s, as if the fate which
      Hamlin had refused to forestall was working itself happily out; and as if, tacitly, the
      poet‐painter and the girl whom he had educated were becoming affianced to each other. None of
      the outward ceremony was broken through; he was always Mr Hamlin, and she Miss Brown, and
      there was never an allusion permitted to any more intimate relations. But it seemed perfectly
      natural that he and she should go walks together; that Aunt Claudia should leave them alone at
      breakfast and luncheon; and that, when the old lady had retired to her room, they should
      remain,
       with brotherly and sisterly ease, though not brotherly and
      sisterly free‐and‐easiness, talking together of an evening. And as they talked, their plans
      seemed constantly to merge; that they should be separated never occurred to either (except
      when Hamlin was in one of his tragic moods), although not a word passed to settle their future
      together. The long courtship, the long enjoyment of a ceremonious and unfettered love, was
      what Hamlin had wished for, and what he had; to a fixed future, a family and family
      affections, he was not the man to look forward; it would have to come, and he did not feel any
      dislike for it, but he gave it no thought. As to Anne, she had never made up her mind that she
      had a right to be Hamlin’s wife; to have thought so for one moment would have seemed to her
      grasping ingratitude; and she was too happy in the present to think about the future. The
      thing to be thought of was to become worthy of him, that was all.
BY the middle of the summer a perfect colony from æsthetic London had settled
      itself, to the amazed terror of the vicar and his parishioners, in Wotton Hall and the inn of
      the adjacent village. The Spencers came, with a perfect shipload of babies, and accompanied by
      Mrs Spencer’s father and mother; Cosmo Chough came, bringing scarcely any luggage except MS.
      poems and old music; Thaddy O’Reilly came, and half‐a‐dozen young poets and painters, to name
      whom would be perfectly superfluous, and who were all the humble worshippers of Walter Hamlin.
      All these people had pictures to paint, poems to compose, articles to write; but the exciting
      question for the whole household was the approaching publication of Hamlin’s new book.
Hamlin’s acquaintance with Anne Brown had not been without a decided influence on his art.
      He had written a number of sonnets about her ever since the moment of their first meeting,
      recording various moods, real and fictitious, in connection with her, and of which he had sent
      or read her the greater number. Perhaps he would have written much the same sort of thing
      about any other woman; but Anne had influenced him at once more directly and more indirectly.
      The æsthetic school of poetry, of which Hamlin and Chough were the most brilliant exponents of
      the younger generation, was evidently running to seed. It was beginning to be obvious, to
      every one who was not an æsthete, that the reign of the mysterious evil passions, of the
      half‐antique, half‐medieval ladies of saturnine beauty and bloodthirsty voluptuousness of the
      demigods and heroes treated like the figures in a piece of tapestry, must be coming to a
      close; and that a return to nature must be preparing. Anne had felt it, and had vaguely
      determined
       that the man who was to revolutionise poetry was Hamlin.
      Indeed, who else could it be? The elder poets were safe in their ruts; the majority of the
      younger ones who had already come forward were mere imitators and caricaturists, not excepting
      the great Chough himself. Hamlin alone was a man of genius; he alone was capable of turning
      over a new leaf; and one or two new departures, attempts at a new way of describing things, if
      not actually an attempt at describing new things, persuaded Anne that the change was
      beginning. She did not like telling him that she perceived it coming; for she thought that
      Hamlin might, did he perceive it, consider it as an apostasy from his original school, and
      draw back. But she encouraged him by showing a marked preference for the pieces which savoured
      of this new style; and she even suggested to him to write a tale, in which he should
      substitute, for the conventional background copied by æsthetic poetry from the borders of
      missals, the pictures of old masters and of their French gods, Gautier
       and Baudelaire, the scenery of his own home, the wide
      commons, the beech‐woods on the downs, the solemn horizons of the fenny country which spread
      from Wotton to the sea. He had written it, and read it to her during that fortnight of
      solitude; and Anne’s heart had beat at the thought of the change which was to be wrought by
      Hamlin’s new book—of the unknown youths hitherto fumbling vainly for a new style, who were to
      recognise in Hamlin the leader of a new school, the prophet of a new art. When the colony of
      London æsthetes arrived at Wotton, the new poem was solemnly read to them. They were all
      seated in the old‐fashioned library, the rows and rows of old novels and books of standard
      literature, the busts of ancient philosophers looking down upon them,—a quaint little assembly
      of ladies in peacock‐blue and dull sage and Japanese dragoned and medieval brocaded gowns,
      with slashed sleeves and limp tails—of men got up to look like Frenchmen or Germans, or
      Renaissance creatures, in wondrous velveteens
      , colonred almost like the bindings of their own books. They
      listened with considerable attention, and obvious impatience to interrupt. The first who did
      so was Mrs Spencer.
“Why, Walter!” she exclaimed indignantly, “what possesses you? are you crazy? Why, you are
      going in for realism; do you know that?”
“I don’t see any particular realism, Edith,” answered Hamlin, testily.
“Come, now, it isn’t Zola, my dear,” said her father, a good‐natured man, who never carried
      his belief in himself to the length which it was carried to by his family.
“No, it isn’t Zola,” cried Miss Spencer; “but it’s worse than Zola. . . .”
(“It’s just the decentest thing I’ve heard for many a long year,” murmured the old
      painter.)
“It’s worse than Zola, because it’s poetry and not prose, because it’s English poetry,
      because it’s poetry by Walter Hamlin, who has hitherto been an apostle of beauty, and is now
      basely turning apostate and going over to ugliness.”
There was a slight laugh at Mrs Spencer’s
       vehemence, in which Hamlin alone did not join.
“I don’t think there’s anything actually ugly in it,” put in Chough, blandly. “Hamlin could
      never write anything ugly. But it is certain that there’s a want of idealism in it, a want of
      that exotic perfume which constitutes the essence of poetry. I think it’s an unfortunately
      chosen subject. . . .”
“I think it’ s perfectly disgusting,” gobbled out Dennistoun, the little rickety poet, who
      had to be carried up and down stairs, and who wrote, while slowly sinking inch by inch into
      the grave, about carrying off lovely girls, and throttling them in the fierceness of his love.
      “Did you notice about the heroine washing the children? I call that beastly, beastly. And
      then, I don’t know how any man can write a poem about people who are in love and get
      married.”
This seemed an unanswerable piece of criticism. Anne alone leaned across the table; she was
      very indignant. “I think,” she
       said, “that there is much more poetry in people who love
      each other respectably, and respectably get married, than in all the nasty situations which
      modern poets write about.”
Cosmo Chough looked at Dennistoun, and Dennistoun looked at Mrs Spencer’s father.
“My dear young lady,” cried the old painter in his broad Scotch, “d’ye ever know any of
      these gentlemen write a poem about people who did any single respectable thing?”
“I wonder you can talk like that, papa,” silenced his daughter, whose zeal for him and his
      school included timely snubbings for himself.
“Well, my dear, I privately think with Miss Brown that there’s nothing more poetic than a
      gude, bonnie lass of a wife, and I don’t wonder a bit at Walter being of that opinion. But
      then, of course, I’m not a poet.”
“It’s that washing of the children which troubles me,” reflected Chough, “and their being
      married. Don’t you think, now, Hamlin, that you might just alter a little, and make it appear
      that they weren’t married?”
“Only put a husband of the lady in the distance,” suggested O’Reilly, laughing.
“Thank you,” said Hamlin, affecting to laugh, “your suggestion is most happy, and most
      characteristic. You are always full of original ideas—all of you,” and he looked bitterly
      round. Chough felt the rebuke and was silent. But Dennistoun, who was gasping, propped up in
      his chair, was furious.
“It’s not a question of an alteration here or there,” he gobbled out; “it’s the whole tone
      of the poem which is pestilent. It’s Wordsworth pure and simple, that’s what it is.”
Hamlin rolled up his MS. He was very white. The others he did not mind, but this little
      rickety Dennistoun, whose poems were the most limited and the most hopelessly morbid of the
      whole set, annoyed him; for in Dennistoun, for all his limitations and repetitions, Hamlin
      recognised the most genuine poet of his circle, his most real rival. Those words, “It’s
      Wordsworth, that’s what it is,” were like
       a blow. He could have knocked down Dennistoun, had he not
      been a cripple.
The conversation was changed; and soon the first dinner‐bell dispersed the company. When
      Anne came down she heard some one stirring in the study next door. She went in. Hamlin was
      seated before the table, his head on his hands; the MS., all crumpled up, lay in front of
      him.
Anne came silently to his side. Her heart was bursting with indignation.
“What’s the matter?” asked Hamlin, crossly.
“Nothing. I only came—because I wanted to see you—because I wanted to tell you how I despise
      those people and their disgusting, unmanly school of poetry—how I hate their stupid
      criticism,—how completely I believe in you and in your poem.”
Anne had spoken with vehemence and almost anger. She took one of his hands, which was
      dog’s‐earing the MS.
“Oh, why,” she asked, “why do you read
       them what you write? Don’t you know them sufficiently to
      know what they will say?”
“I never thought—” and Hamlin stopped. “I never thought that that fellow Dennistoun would
      ever dare to speak like that about a poem of mine.” His tone was angry and tearful, like that
      of a punished child.
“Nor did I. I never thought any one would dare to speak like that. But what does it
      matter—what can the words of such a man matter to you?”
He did not answer.
“Surely,” went on Anne, “you can’t mind what they say? You believe in your poem, as I
      believe in it?”
It seemed so impossible to her how any one could not believe in that poem, which seemed to
      her so strong, and noble, and beautiful.
“I know you believe in it,” answered Hamlin, brusquely; “you made me write it—so of course
      you must—”
“And—and—are you sorry to have written it?”
“I don’t know; I can’t judge. There’s O’Reilly outside.”
“The disconsolate poet being consoled by his beautiful fiancée for having written about people who were united in legitimate wedlock,”
      whispered O’Reilly to Mrs Spencer as they entered the room.
“Well, Hamlin, old fellow, do you repent you of that sinful marriage between your hero and
      heroine?” asked O’Reilly.
“I repent me of nothing at all, except of having read my poem to a parcel of damned
      meretricious rhymesters,” answered Hamlin, angrily.
“Walter!” cried Mrs Spencer, “how can you talk like that!”
But, despite this bravado, Anne felt, and her spirit sank within her, that Hamlin had been
      disgusted with his poem. He was rather cantankerous throughout dinner; and Anne, watching him,
      felt a strange mixture of indignation—towards his critics for their criticism, and towards
      Hamlin for minding it.
THE time has come for him to break with the old school, thought Anne; consoling
      herself for a certain childish petulance, perhaps not quite new to her, in Hamlin’s
      manner.
But Anne proved mistaken. Whether the critics became less rabid on the following day, or
      whether Hamlin was suddenly smitten with the truth of their criticism, she could not say. He
      was very snappish at first towards Chough, and absolutely refused to speak to Dennistoun for
      nearly twenty‐four hours. Chough, who loved Hamlin like the apple of his eye, would not,
      however, be spurned; he followed Hamlin about, he soothed him, he flattered him, he assured
      him that he was much the greatest poet of his generation; but he repeated, almost
       with tears in his eyes, Dennistoun’s criticism.
“Such a poem will never, never do,” he cried; “it is impossible, intolerable,
      and it will just put some fellow like Dennistoun into your place.”
“Thank you for your advice, Chough,” answered Hamlin, angrily; “I think I told you before
      that I didn’t want it.”
Anne did not revive the subject of the unlucky poem. It was useless provoking quarrels
      between Hamlin and his friends; quarrels in which she was forced to own to herself that he
      showed himself too easily mortified and put out of temper. If he had been taught to mistrust
      their judgment, if he had been alienated from their school by their absurd criticism, why, so
      much the better. This business drew Anne’s attention to the poetry of the school; she re‐read
      a number of poems by Chough, Dennistoun, and several gods, demigods, and heroes of the
      movement. Whether it was that she had read
       them fragmentarily before, or that she had not understood
      their full meaning, or whether her attention was now called to their bad points rather than to
      their good ones, she scarcely knew; but it seemed to her that she had never before
      comprehended this style of poetry: its beauty had ceased to please her, it seemed to her
      false, emasculate, diseased. Hamlin alone had not gone to its worst lengths; he had sinned,
      but comparatively little. He was evidently intended for something better. And Anne thought
      with pride of that “Ballad of the Fens” which they had all fallen upon, and which was to be
      the signal for a new era in poetry. Soon it would be out; and she the only person to have
      appreciated it. It seemed to Anne that at last, in her humble way, she might be beginning to
      repay the debt of gratitude which she owed Hamlin (not that she wished that the debt should
      ever be less, God knows, or dreamed that it could be); but at last Hamlin might reap some
      advantage from his generosity. He
       had stooped to make her, to turn the Perrys’ servant into a
      lady; in her turn, perhaps she, the woman of the lower classes, might encourage the delicately
      nurtured poet to attempt things bolder, simpler, and more healthy than he had done before.
The proof‐sheets of the new volume began to come in. Anne had read nearly all its contents
      at one time or other, yet Hamlin, in his grave, ceremoniously adoring way, handed on the
      proofs to her. One day a fresh bundle came by post. After breakfast, Hamlin took Anne
      aside.
“I want you to read these sonnets,” he said. “I don’t think you have read them all. There
      are rather more than I care to print in this volume, so I should like you to select those
      which you think the best or the least bad: divide them into two packets, and tell me which you
      prefer.”
Anne was quite taken aback for joy, and at the same time for fear.
“Don’t say that,” she said; “I could never,
       never take the responsibility of deciding about your poems.
      Let me read them, and let me tell you what I like best, but don’t ask me to choose. What am I,
      that I should decide in such matters?”
“You are the person whom I trust and respect, and—will you let me say so?—whom I love most
      in all the world,” said Hamlin, solemnly. “For whom should my poetry be written except for
      you? Whom else should I care to please? Are you not the best and worthiest thing in my life,
      and is it not my highest ambition to do anything worthy of you?”
Hamlin had never spoken so passionately and earnestly before.
Anne did not answer, but she squeezed his hand, and the gesture, and the look accompanying
      it, meant “I love you.”
“Listen,” said Hamlin, detaining her as she was leaving—“I want to say one word more. These
      sonnets are not merely my verses; they are myself—and many of them, you will see, are about
      you. Perhaps you
       would rather that some of these were not published; perhaps
      your permitting them to be published might mean more than you should wish. Tell me your
      opinion frankly, and put aside everything that you don’t like.”
“I will,” answered Anne. “What you wish me to do, I must do.”
She went up into her room, shut the door, and seating herself at the table, unrolled the
      little bundle of proof‐sheets. But at first she could not read, or could read only the
      titles—her heart beat so, and the blood boomed so in her temples. That he should love her so
      much, believe in her so much—that it should really be he, just he and she, and not some one
      else; it seemed too strange to be true. She slowly began to read the sonnets. Some of them she
      knew already; others were expansions in verse of things which Hamlin had said or written to
      her; many were about herself, passionate, with a sort of delicate, subdued, respectful
      passion, played, like some exquisite instrument, in various keys and rhythms of subdued pain
      or
       gladness. She felt so proud and glad, and at the same time
      so moved and saddened, that she almost cried over them. There were a lot of other sonnets,
      descriptive of places and of moods. Some of these she did not at all relish. They were not
      fleshly nor exactly improper; but they contained allusions which Anne could not help
      following, allusions which she did not quite understand, but which she did not like. She felt
      half ashamed of herself, wondering whether all the impure poetry which she had lately been
      reading, whether her prejudice against the school to which these decidedly belonged, might not
      be making her imagine things which were not meant; and Anne blushed at the thought—blushed at
      her knowing so many things, having learned so many things, in her half education as an Italian
      servant, in her culture as an æsthetic personage, which perhaps other girls of her age would
      not dream of. It was probably only her own morbid fancy. But then she came upon a set of
      sonnets—
       no fewer than twelve connected together by similarity of
      title—which put an end to her doubts. She felt giddy and sick as she read them; mysterious and
      mystical hankerings, mysterious half‐longing repentance, and half‐repentant longings after
      untold shameful things. Anne pushed aside the proof‐sheets, and leaned her head on her hands.
      She seemed to be smothering for want of air; she went to the window, and leaned against its
      rails. It was raining—a steady, clear fine rain. She looked at it mechanically as it filled
      the air like a thin veil, and crevassed the sand outside with yellow trickles of water. She
      did not for one instant believe that Hamlin had ever felt the things about which he was
      writing; but he had written about them. She knew, from an unerring instinct, as well as from
      her own deep love, that Hamlin was as pure a man as could be found; had he not been towards
      her—was he not, at that very moment—the very personification of chivalrous and spiritual
      lovingness? Then she
       remembered the allusions which, without understanding them,
      used to frighten her in his letters—the allusions to vague evil which beckoned to him, which
      surrounded him; and she remembered also his constant references in conversation to his being
      unlike what she imagined, to his baseness and unworthiness. Two years earlier she would have
      been seized with an agonising terror; a week before she might have been overcome with pitying
      admiration at his self‐tormenting moral purity, taking umbrage at every thought of evil which
      passed across and seemed to soil his mind. But somehow, now, she did neither. She did not for
      one second believe that Hamlin was in any way a bad man. She repeated to herself that he was
      morbidly introspective, self‐scrutinising, morbidly imaginative; but she could not realise
      that these hateful sonnets had been written in any great agony of imagined self‐debasement;
      they were so artistic, so evidently written with enjoyment, so self‐conscious; they were so
      clearly not the
       doubts of a troubled mind, but the work of a poet—and, what
      was much worse, so clearly the work of a poet of a definite school, of the school of Chough
      and Dennistoun and all the others, whom she was beginning to loathe. Anne looked at them over
      and over again. There was no reality in them; mere revolting pose. Gradually her
      mind settled about them. They were doubtless things written long ago, when, without knowing
      what it all meant, he had been carried away by the wave of imitation of one or two shameless
      or foolish writers. He had alluded to sonnets which he had expected her to dislike, he had
      insisted so on a certain number being put aside; if he had made her think that it was the
      sonnets about herself which provoked his doubts, that came from a sort of shame, an
      unwillingness to point out to her what she might perhaps overlook: it was not quite
      straightforward, but everybody, Anne had learned by this time, did not do right in a quite
      straightforward way. The only thing which perplexed her was, why he
       had submitted these poems to her at all? Why had he not torn
      them up? why shown them to her? A little she could not help, as a woman, resenting his having
      done so at all. But perhaps he had done so to show her the difference between what he had been
      and what he was going to be,—perhaps—perhaps he had got a little callous, living among poets
      of this school. Anyhow, they were things of the past, and Anne did not distress herself any
      longer about them, so foreign did they seem to Hamlin, so impossible was it to bring them into
      connection with the thought of him. She put the proofs into her pocket, and waited for an
      opportunity of giving them back. Before dinner, when the guests were safe out of the way, she
      called Hamlin into the library.
“Here are the proofs,” she said, laying them on the table.
“Have you read them already?” cried Hamlin; “how sweet of you! Now tell me what you think
      about them.”
He looked so cheerful, so utterly unconscious
       of the possibility of Anne’s having anything to say
      disagreeable to himself and herself, that she began to feel nervous.
“I think they are most of them very beautiful,” she answered slowly—“indeed, quite some of
      the best things you have ever done—and especially those about me; I am very grateful to you
      for them. But”—she resumed, after a moment’s silence—“there are some which I dislike
      extremely, and which are utterly unworthy of you. I have put them into the smaller roll by
      themselves.” She spoke rapidly, decidedly, but when she had done she felt that she was
      crimson.
Hamlin seemed quite speechless for astonishment. He quickly unrolled the smaller parcel, and
      glanced at its contents. A look of surprised ill‐humour crossed his face.
“I am quite astonished at your choice,” he said with affected coolness; “for these are the
      very sonnets which Chough and Dennistoun and all my other friends picked out as among my
      best.”
So he had already provided himself with a stock of criticisms.
“I am no judge of their technical merits,” answered Anne, trying to feel as if she had
      expected this news. “It seemed to me that they were very excellent in workmanship, and there
      is beautiful imagery in them. But I think the subject and tone of them horrible.” she spoke
      resolutely and unflinchingly, because she saw Hamlin’s eyes fixed incredulously on her. “You
      asked me to give you my frank opinion; and even had you not asked me, I should have felt bound
      to tell you that I think those sonnets ought not to be published. Perhaps you think it strange
      of me to speak so openly; but, of course, I understand what those sonnets allude to, and, of
      course, so will every grown‐up reader.”
Hamlin bit his moustache.
“There is not a single word to which any one can take objection in these sonnets,” and he
      turned over the proofs.
“What do the words matter? It is the
       meaning. I think,” and Anne vainly tried to soften down her
      expressions,—“I think that those sonnets are things you should be ashamed of.”
Hamlin’s eyes flashed, but he kept his temper.
“Everything is legitimate for the sake of an artistic effect,” he said, echoing the worn‐out
      aphorism of his school.
“Even to do a disgraceful thing?”
“I can see nothing disgraceful in a man attempting to describe what has passed through his
      mind.”
Hamlin spoke sullenly and doggedly.
“You have shifted your position,” cried Anne. “You intimated just now that a man may pretend
      to anything for the sake of an artistic effect. And now you are trying to make me believe that
      you really have felt and thought those horrible things. It is of no use. You have not—”
“How do you know?” exclaimed Hamlin, angrily. “Do you think I tell you everything that I
      have ever done, or thought, or felt?”
Anne was silent for a moment: that he should prefer to make her believe in his own baseness!
      It was horrible, loathsome, and, at the same time, pitiable and childish.
“I know you have not,” she repeated, “because I know you to be a gentleman. And I know that
      all that is affectation—school affectation—learned from creatures like Dennistoun and Chough;
      they have all done it, or something of the sort, and you have learned what comes naturally to
      their dirty minds. Oh, Mr Hamlin, do not commit this abomination—this baseness of pretending
      to shameful things which you have not felt or thought; do not be so mean, so base, so lying,
      as to slander yourself for the sake of an artistic effect.” Anne had seized his arm; he was
      shaken by her unexpected vehemence and passion; he had never thought that Anne could become so
      passionate about anything; he looked on, taken by surprise, not knowing what to think.
“Do not slander yourself,” repeated Anne—“do not blacken your real self, which does not
       belong to yourself alone, which belongs also to your
      friends, to your honour, which belongs in part to me. Do not lie to me about yourself!”
“As you choose,” answered Hamlin; “perhaps you are right; though, heaven knows, I thought
      myself, when writing those sonnets, but too bitterly in earnest.”
Anne’s look—a look of incredulous contempt—smote him like a rod.
“I suppose I am apt to be morbid,” he said, sadly; “that is the wretchedness of my life,
      that I never know where the truth about myself really lies—it seems to me that I ought to
      speak out, and yet . . .”
“And yet it is mere nonsense.”
Hamlin smiled a forced smile.
“Perhaps it is. Since you are determined, I suppose it must be.”
“You won’t publish those sonnets?” asked Anne, anxiously.
“I will not, since they offend you so much. But it is curious, that of all the people to
       whom I have shown them, you are the only one who has taken
      the slightest exception to them.”
For a moment Hamlin had been overcome, had been delighted by this sudden burst of
      impetuosity, by this passionate belief in him and vindication of himself. But now, as he again
      glanced at the sonnets, he was once more annoyed and resentful.
“Such things must be judged from a purely artistic standpoint,” he said with some
      irritation.
“I am willing to judge art from an artistic standpoint; but I cannot judge from an artistic
      standpoint an honourable man trying to defame himself.”
Hamlin sighed.
“Well, after all, I bade you select, and the principal thing is that you should be
      satisfied. But it is a pity, because those were just the best sonnets in the
      book; and the book will be very small without the ‘Ballad of the Fens.’”
“The ‘Ballad of the Fens’?—aren’t you going to print that? What do you mean?”
Could Hamlin be merely worrying her, to vent his annoyance at the loss of the sonnets?
“The ‘Ballad of the Fens’ has been torn up,” answered Hamlin, with a kind of dogged
      satisfaction.
“Oh, Mr Hamlin! How could you—the finest thing you have ever written.”
The ballad torn up!
“I know you thought it good, and so did I myself. But, on reflection, I saw that my friends
      were right, and that such a thing would not do.”
He spoke sharply, brutally, as if to bring home to Anne the unreliableness of her judgment:
      she had induced him to write it; she had praised it; and she wanted him to tear up those
      sonnets.
“It is a bad plan to keep things about which one is doubtful,” he went on; “so I tore it up.
      I think it was wiser; don’t you?”
“No,” said Anne, in a husky voice which burst out in a way that almost frightened him; “no,
      no—it was . . .” but she said no more.
ONE morning Hamlin received two unexpected letters at breakfast. From his looks,
      which he was at all times quite unable to control, it was clear that one of them brought good
      news, while the other must be about some disagreeable matter.
“Edmund Lewis is coming the day after to‐morrow,” announced Hamlin to his aunt, to Anne, and
      to his guests.
There was a chorus of exclamations of surprise, sprinkled with pleasure.
“Who is Edmund Lewis?” asked Anne. “He is an old friend of mine, a charming fellow whom I
      have not seen for some years. Some of the drawings in the drawing‐room at Hammersmith are by
      him.”
Anne remembered the name, and the strange, beautiful, cruel, mysterious, out‐of‐drawing
      heads in crayon, which had curiously impressed her the first morning after her arrival in
      England, rose before her eyes; since then she had seen so many similar things, had got to
      understand so completely that mysterious, beautiful faces, with combed‐out hair, big weird
      eyes, and cruel lips, were so much school property, that she had become quite indifferent to
      them.
“I thought you told me that something strange had happened to him—that he had left England
      for good,” remarked Anne.
“Oh, it was nothing particularly strange,” interrupted little O’Reilly—“only a German lady
      whom he met one day, blond, fat, thirty‐five, who was nothing but a soul—you know the sort of
      thing—with a husband who was a great deal besides a soul (a charming man, for the rest, and
      quite wildly in love with the Gnädige Frau). The excess of soul having induced
      acute neuralgia in the lady,
       poor Teddy Lewis, who is a tremendous magnetiser, was
      called in to soothe her agonies, during which process the lady discovered that the soul‐sorrow
      and consequent neuralgia from which she suffered was due to the soullessness of her husband,
      and that only the brotherly affection of Ted could cure her. The difficulty was the husband,
      who loved the lady fervently, and she him, but not in a way which should satisfy her soul.
      Hence struggles, agonies, &c.—you’ve read it all in the ‘Wahlverwandschaften’—finally
      ended by the husband being implored to sacrifice himself to the spiritual exigencies of his
      adored wife, which absolutely required that he should divorce her and let her marry Lewis.
      That’s all.”
“How can you talk in such a flippant way, Mr O’Reilly?” cried Mrs Spencer. “You have a way
      of making the most serious things seem ridiculous. Poor Mrs Lewis! she’s dead now; you needn’t
      make fun of her.”
“Poor Mrs Lewis!” laughed O’Reilly;
       “well, you know you wouldn’t receive her, Mrs Spencer, when
      she first came to England.”
“I thought her a designing woman then; I didn’t know all the circumstances.”
“Come now, Edith,” interrupted her father, in his broad Scotch; “I think the
      less ye knew those circumstances the better it was for all concerned.”
“I don’t see that at all, papa. I don’t see why a woman’s happiness should be sacrificed,”
      and Mrs Spencer, who was the most devoted of wives and mothers, tossed her head rebelliously.
      “I don’t see why the world should insist that a woman is to be satisfied with a husband who is
      good to her and her children. After all, she has a soul, and that requires response.”
“Would you behave as Mrs Lewis did?” asked O’Reilly, “If—well—let me see—Mr Spencer were
      suddenly to develop an overpowering belief in the Royal Academy and in Zola?”
“Papa would never have let me marry a man who could ever develop such
      beliefs.”
At this perfectly solemn answer there was a general laugh; even poor Mr Spencer, who was the
      most timid of æsthetical persons, joining.
“I think it was rather hard on poor Ted Lewis,” remarked Hamlin, “to become necessary to the
      soul of a lady whether he liked it or no.”
“Oh, Lewis liked it well enough, be sure of that,” answered Chough, bitterly.
“Don’t you think it was rather hard upon the husband,” suggested Anne, “since he really
      cared for his wife? Fancy being abandoned like that, and his children left without a
      mother!”
“He was at liberty to marry again,” replied Mrs Spencer sharply, still thinking of what she
      would do if by any chance Mr Spencer were to suddenly disbelieve in her father and his
      school.
“What would you have had Lewis, or rather
       the poor Baroness, do, Miss Brown?” asked O’Reilly.
“Why, I would have them never dream of each other; but if they had been so foolish, be
      ashamed as soon as possible, and each go his and her way, and attend to his and her proper
      concerns.”
Dennistoun, who had sat silent at the other end of the table, propped up on his chair,
      suddenly stretched out his long neck, and gobbled out—
“Love permits no man or woman to resist: it is imperious, irresistible, dragging us along to
      happiness, or misery, or shame, whether we will or not. Love is the extinction of the reason,
      the extinction of the will, or rather the merging of the whole individuality in one mysterious
      desire. Those who can talk of resistance have never experienced love. Woe to them! their hour
      is coming!”—and he tried to fix his weak eyes on Anne.
“Well,” she answered quickly, “I hope I may never make such a disgusting fool of myself
       as you describe, Mr Dennistoun; but as I think that not
      everybody is liable to go mad, so also I think that not everybody is liable to falling in love
      in your sense of the word.”
O’Reilly leaned over the back of her chair.
“It happens only to those who want to write about it, Miss Brown,” he whispered.
“Anyhow,” remarked Hamlin, “Lewis is a charming fellow, and I am sure you will appreciate
      him, Miss Brown. He is, moreover, the most backbitten man in creation,” and Hamlin glanced
      round the table; “but you must never believe any harm of him.”
Perhaps, thought Anne, Edmund Lewis was disliked by this set for the same reasons which, she
      could not help understanding, were beginning to make her vaguely unpopular. Still, she did not
      like the story of his marriage, she did not like the recollection of his morbidly beautiful
      drawings.
“It’s good news about Lewis,” said Hamlin to her after breakfast; “but unfortunately
       there’s been rather a bothering letter also. Did I ever
      mention a cousin of mine, the daughter of papa’s sister and of a horrible Russian creature
      called Polozoff? She was brought up with us as a child, and is connected with a great many
      painful circumstances. I have completely lost sight of her since she was about fifteen, and
      now I suddenly get a letter from her telling me that her husband is dead, and that she is
      coming to England. I rather loathe the idea of her, and if you knew the part she played in
      this house fifteen years ago, you could understand it. But the worst is that Aunt Claudia
      perfectly abhorred her—I will tell you the horrible, prosaic, tragic story some day—and that I
      perfectly dread having to break the news to her. I do hate a scene so! There she is; I suppose
      I’d better tell her.”
Mrs Macgregor was walking slowly up and down the gravel walk before the house.
“Do come and keep me in countenance.
       It really is no fault of mine, but I know my aunt will be
      furious.”
“What’s the matter?” cried Mrs Macgregor suspiciously, as if expecting to be told something
      disagreeable.
“I wanted to tell you, Aunt Claudia,” said Hamlin, “that I had a letter this morning.”
“Yes, I know, from your dear Lewis,” interrupted Mrs Macgregor. “What’s that to me?”
“I don’t mean that one. I had a letter from—guess from whom?” and Hamlin tried to
      smile—“from Cousin Sacha.”
Mrs Macgregor recoiled as if she had trodden on a toad.
“From whom?”
“From Cousin Sacha. Sacha Polozoff—Madame Elaguine, I suppose I ought to call her.”
For a moment there was a dead silence. The old lady’s face, usually so vacant, was lit up
      into a terrific energy of anger.
“ What business has she to write to you?”
“Well, really, aunt, I don’t see why she shouldn’t,” answered Hamlin. “After all,
       we are cousins, and we have never openly quarrelled.
”My aunt,“ he explained, turning to Anne, ”has got a tremendous aversion—a prejudice—towards
      this one and only cousin of mine. She disliked her father, very reasonably, and I think she
      has let her dislike descend to the second generation rather unreasonably.“
”Unreasonably!“ exclaimed Mrs Macgregor; ”you know it was not unreasonable,
      Walter—you know what that Cousin Sacha of yours was in this house.“
”I know nothing of the sort,“ cried Hamlin, angrily. ”I know that Sacha lived in this house
      as a child; I know she left it as a child; I know we all hated her and hers, and that perhaps
      they deserved it; but I know that we have no right to hate a woman of whom we know nothing,
      because she happened to have been a badly brought up child, years ago.
“At all events,” went on Hamlin, “I insist upon her being properly treated as a lady, and a
      relation.”
“Properly treated!” almost foamed out his aunt. “Do you mean to say that she is coming
       here?”
“Not here; but to London. Her husband is dead; and she writes to me that she thinks she had
      better send her boy to an English school; and as the only person in England upon whom she has
      a claim—”
“A pretty claim!” interrupted Mrs Macgregor.
“As her first cousin, she has written to me for information and assistance.”
“And you are going to give it her, Walter?”
“Of course I am. And I hope, Aunt Claudia, that you will remember that I won’t be disgraced
      towards a lady who has done us no harm. She will be in London, most likely, when we return at
      the beginning of winter.”
Anne had heard many allusions to this Cousin Sacha, and they belonged to that class of
      cynical hints which always made her indignant with Mrs Macgregor. She instinctively took part
      with this unknown woman,
       and she admired Hamlin’s decision and generosity. Why did
      he not always act like this?
“That child—that Sacha,” said Mrs Macgregor, when Hamlin had left them, “was the evil genius
      of his house. She was sent as if to embody all the bad tendencies of the family. It was a
      miserable house at best, my brother‐in‐law’s, for he was a weak, vicious, violent man. But
      just when this wretched child was brought to us my sister had died, Mr Hamlin was very much
      shaken and repentant for the life he had led her, and I really believe that he had made up his
      mind to live decently for the sake of his children. The two boys were growing up, and there
      seemed some chance of things going quietly and happily. Then Mr Hamlin thought fit to invite
      home his sister, who was a widow; she had married a horrible Russian, a sort of indecent
      madman, with every possible vice under the sun. She was an odious woman herself, the regular
      slave‐driving type of the Hamlins. Oh, you can’t judge of them from
       Walter; he’s like my sister, not like them. Well, she was
      violent, and overbearing, and tyrannical, and lazy, and hysterical, like a regular Jamaica
      woman. She was enough in the house; but then she had this child of hers, this Sacha, with
      her—a wretched, neglected creature, brought up by French servants, who were her father’s
      mistresses, and literally with no more idea of right and wrong than any of the little heathens
      whom they pick out of gutters in the East End and send to reformatories.”
“Poor child!” said Anne. She shuddered at this glimpse into Hamlin’s early life; it had a
      horrible attraction for her, and yet she felt that she would far rather know nothing about it.
      All this filth seemed to cling to her mind and soil it. “How horrible for her!”
“She was about twelve when she came to us,” went on Mrs Macgregor meditatively, “and you
      couldn’t believe that such a child could exist in Christendom. She could no more spell the
      simplest word than I can speak
       Arabic; she spoke an awful jargon of English and French and
      Russian and German, and she used to talk about things, and repeat stories which she had heard
      from her nurses, or her father, or her father’s friends—I don’t know whom—that were enough to
      make your hair stand on end. Mr Hamlin was in perfect despair; because, although he was a
      vicious sort of man himself, and quite did my poor sister to death with his bad conduct, he
      was awfully strict about all his kith and kin, and kept the boys as tight as if he had been a
      Puritan. What we all had to go through, you have no idea. At first I was quite ashamed to let
      any governess see such a little heathen as that child was, and we had to pay the governesses
      double wages to keep them on. Then, every time that they tried to break Sacha off some one of
      her disgusting ways, her mother, who was always moaning and groaning with imaginary maladies
      on her sofa, and no more thought of her daughter than of the man in the moon, would go into
      hysterics
       and throw things in their face, and have them turned away,
      and keep Sacha for a day in her room, kissing her and giving her sweets. Well, we thought we
      were little by little getting the better of her; and then, thank goodness, Madame Polozoff,
      that was Mr Hamlin’s sister, died. Sacha learned a few things, and began to behave a little
      more like a Christian child; but it was only on the surface. She was utterly and thoroughly
      corrupt. When the boys returned from school (Arnold was sixteen, and Walter seventeen), the
      mischief began. That wretched Sacha fell madly in love with Walter, and began running after
      him; but Walter perfectly loathed the sight of her: he was always the cold, moral,
      irreproachable sort of creature that he is. Then she went after Arnold. Arnold was much the
      livelier of the two: he was a dear, warm‐ hearted, simple sort of boy, a perfect scapegrace,
      always in pickles, but we only liked him the better. But that wretched Sacha (he didn’t care a
      rap about her either,
       for she was a horrid, lying, sickly, stunted little thing),
      in order to curry favour with him, put him up to all sorts of mischief, which I suppose she
      had learned from her precious father and his servants. What was poor Arnold to know? The nasty
      little fiend used to get out of bed and unlock the house‐door for him, so that he might go in
      and out at night and get into scrapes with the village girls, and drink at the pot‐house; and
      she used to steal the wine and the brandy out of the cupboards for him, and teach him all
      sorts of ungentlemanly, knavish, lying ways; I believe she used even to give him money out of
      her savings, just for him to go to the pot‐house. If ever a boy was ruined by a woman, poor
      Arnold was ruined by that miserable Sacha. Then, in return for her assistance and her lies and
      her money, he had to pretend to like her, to kiss her, and call her his darling little cousin,
      and promise to marry her, whom he abominated. Meanwhile Walter went dreaming on as he always
       has, avoiding Sacha like the plague, and not perceiving any
      of the pretty doings of his brother; and Mr Hamlin, who thought that his house, just because
      it was his house, must be the palace of virtue, and his son, because he was his son, must be
      the most obedient and austere boy in the world, took to liking Sacha and her pretty, foreign
      little ways, and to think her quite a nice little girl, just the wife for one of his sons.
      Then one day (I suppose Sacha thought that poor Arnold did not kiss her and darling
       little Sacha her enough, or got jealous or something) they had a great row, and Arnold
      called her a liar, and said that if she were not a girl he would thrash her well. So Sacha
      rushed off sobbing to Mr Hamlin, and told him that Arnold had called her a liar, and had
      threatened to beat her; and Mr Hamlin called Arnold, and struck him in the face till his nose
      bled, and called him a coward and a brute, and swore he would cut him off with a shilling.
      Then it all came out about Arnold’s escapades,
       his nights at the pot‐house, and so forth; and of course
      his father said that all he said about Sacha’s putting him up to it was a pack of lies, and
      finally it ended with Mr Hamlin behaving in such a way that poor Arnold ran away to America.
      Then we had no news of him for about six months, and Mr Hamlin wanted to take Walter into his
      good graces, although he had never cared for him, and Sacha tried to make up to Walter. But
      Walter also ran away to his uncle, because he said he would not stay unless Arnold was
      recalled, or at least money were sent to him. So Mr Hamlin had to give in and send for Arnold;
      but meanwhile he had quarrelled with Sacha, and packed her off to her Russian relatives, who
      sent her to some German deaconesses on the Rhine—a nice child to bring up! Walter returned,
      and began to prepare for the university; then Arnold was got back from America; but he had
      only got into worse and worse ways—he was always drunk, and finally his mind began to give
       way. Poor Arnold! he was much, much nicer than Walter—such
      a bright, good‐humoured, manly fellow—and now . . .”
“Now?” repeated Anne in astonishment; she had listened without saying a word to this
      horrible page of family history. “Now? Do you mean that Mr Hamlin’s brother is alive?”
Mrs Macgregor looked at her with strange wide eyes. “Of course he is. We say he is dead; or
      if not dead, mad. Well, he might as soon be either, poor boy. He wanders about with a servant.
      Walter allows him some money. We never talk of him. Ah!” cried Mrs Macgregor, and it was a
      kind of suppressed cry of pain—“and that it is all, all owing to Sacha Polozoff; and she has
      the insolence to write to Walter!”
Anne did not know what to say.
“But,” she could not help saying after a minute, for it seemed to her as if the whole story
      were so unjust, so one‐sided, as if there were so much too much laid at the door of
       the unhappy, neglected, corrupt child—so much too little
      pity or indignation shown at her having been thus neglected and corrupted,—“but, Aunt
      Claudia—is it fair to put it all down to Sacha? After all, Arnold was sixteen, he was a man,
      he had been decently brought up—and she, she was an ignorant child, brought up as you say
      without idea of right or wrong. Don’t you think—oh, don’t you think, auntie dear, that it was
      mainly the fault of old Mr Hamlin, and his bad example, and his closing his eyes to his boy’s
      behaviour?” It seemed to her so frightful that a girl, a child, a victim, just because she was
      a victim, should have such a weight of guilt thrown upon her.
“She was a woman, and he was a man,” said Mrs Macgregor fiercely, her love for her lost
      nephew, and her strange theories of sexual influences mixing grotesquely and tragically—“and a
      woman can always do what she will with a man; a woman can always, unless she be as weak as my
      poor
       sister, ruin or save a Hamlin, ever since Walter’s
      great‐uncle Mordaunt went to the bad, even worse than poor Arnold.”
“Some of them,” she said after a moment, “are good, and some are bad: my brother‐in‐law was
      bad—Arnold was good, and Walter is good; but they are all as weak as water, these Hamlins—weak
      in goodness or badness, every one of them.”
Anne sighed. And as she walked through the big, stately rooms of Wotton House, she thought
      of the horrible scenes which had happened in there; of the waste of life by violence and vice
      and neglect which they had witnessed; especially of that wretched, vicious child, held so
      terribly responsible for the folly and wickedness of others. And the sense of the terrible
      power of circumstances, of the degradation into which others may lead one, or out of which
      others may raise one, which had been silently growing in her as she watched the world in her
      tragic way, came over her with a terrifying rush;
       and she felt, half in anxiety at scarcely escaped danger,
      half in joy at safety, a tumult of gratitude when she remembered how Walter Hamlin had raised
      her up, led her out of the way of all temptation and evil contact, and left her safe and
      strong as she knew herself to be.
As the summer changed into autumn, the guests at Wotton Hall were gradually renewed. Chough
      remained, and at Anne’s particular desire sent for his two little girls, sad, strange, Cockney
      creatures, to whom the large house, the garden, the country walks and country sights, were as
      things of another world. But the Spencers, Dennistoun, and O’Reilly departed; and in their
      place arrived the two Leigh girls and Edmund Lewis. The last‐named gentleman did not by any
      means strike Anne as a fascinating being. He was a stumpy, high‐shouldered, thick‐set little
      man, always very slackly dressed, with small, rather handsome features, and a profusion of
      curly reddish hair and beard, which made his face
       look even more like unbaked dough than it might otherwise
      have done. Some people considered him very handsome, and it was obvious that he himself felt
      as if he were tall; for he stumped and slouched in and out of rooms with his hands in his
      pockets, and dropped on to chairs and sofas with the heavy importance of gait of a Hercules.
      Nothing could be more comic than the contrast between this lumbering and solemn redhaired
      dwarf and Cosmo Chough, black, fierce, alert, courteous, and grandiloquent. Lewis was silent;
      but when he spoke he fixed his handsome eyes searchingly upon one, and either trailed his
      voice along with slow emphasis, or answered in monosyllables, which left in you an
      uncomfortable feeling of having made some inappropriate or impertinent remark. He had,
      moreover, lips of the colour of the very best sealing‐wax; a peculiarity which, while
      decidedly adding to the pictorial value of a red‐haired man, has a something quite
      particularly repulsive to certain people, among
       whom Anne Brown must be counted. However, she tried to like
      Mr Lewis. In some respects he was a more genuine personality than Chough, or Dennistoun, or
      almost any other of Hamlin’s æsthetic friends. He did not make himself up—manner, appearance,
      ideas, or words—to look like anything which he was not, or at all events which he did not
      thoroughly believe himself to be; and he was, moreover, much more in the way of will and
      definite tendencies, and felt himself (however mistakenly) to be much more in the way of
      power, character, and importance, than any other man whom Anne had ever come across, except
      her cousin Richard, between whom and Edmund Lewis there existed, despite a thousand
      differences, a certain resemblance. And perhaps it was exactly this resemblance to Richard
      Brown,—a man whom Anne did not exactly like, nay, who even occasionally repelled her a little,
      but of whose power and truthfulness and generosity Anne could not doubt,—perhaps it was this
      resemblance, however
       vague it might be, which made Anne for some time believe
      that Edmund Lewis, little as he pleased her, might be a remarkable sort of man, and treat
      Chough’s insinuations against him as merely another instance of that childish unreasonableness
      of likings and dislikings, which, together with vanity and weakness of will, she had got to
      associate with a poetic endowment. Over Hamlin, at all events, Edmund Lewis had an undeniable
      influence; an influence which he himself avowedly attributed to his magnetic powers, which he
      would exert, or imagine that he exerted, sitting lazily opposite his friends or victims,
      staring vaguely at them and speaking in his slow, important voice. He was a painter, in an
      irregular sort of way, himself, and took much more interest in Hamlin’s art than in his
      poetry; so that Hamlin, who was sick of versifying for the moment, had a fit of painting once
      more, and spent hours locked up in his studio with Lewis, while poor Cosmo Chough was more and
      more thrown upon Anne and her friends.
       But the girls had got to understand Chough, and the fund of
      kindness and self‐sacrificing gentleness which was hidden beneath the little man’s poetical
      thin‐skinnedness and the queer poetical veneer of mystic wickedness which he himself did not
      understand. He could not by any possibility be broken of his tendency to talk overmuch about
      Messalina, Lucretia Borgia, and La Belle Heaulmière; but by this time it was quite obvious
      that he had not the smallest experience of ladies of any such character, still less the
      faintest thought of giving offence by his allusions to them. To Anne he was utterly devoted:
      he was fascinated by her beauty, afraid of its tragic earnestness, afraid of her downright,
      quiet manner, afraid of her silent contemptuousness, of her uncompromising censoriousness; but
      if ever a person appreciated Anne’s kindness, her energy, her imperious desire of helping
      others, it was Chough. Anne had often spoken to him about the neglected education of his
      little girls; not reproachfully, for she knew but too well on
       what it depended, but trying to stir him up to resist the
      sort of fatality which seemed to hang over his family concerns. And now she insisted on taking
      the children’s education into her own hands, until Chough should be able to afford sending
      them to a proper school. Perhaps the thought of that neglected, unconsciously corrupted,
      terribly responsible little heathen girl, who had done so much mischief in Wotton Hall fifteen
      years before, had something to do with Anne’s energetic behaviour towards the little
      Choughs—to whom, every morning regularly, she gave a two hours’ lesson in grammar and writing
      and history, as complete as if she had been a schoolmistress and they her pupils; until their
      father, astonished at their unexpected development of human faculties, took it in his head to
      turn them into first‐rate musicians, and actually got up at six in the morning to teach them
      the piano, while Hamlin and Lewis were still asleep.
Marjory Leigh, who had considered Anne
       in the light of an irresponsible but decidedly
      objectionable æsthetic villain on her departure from London, looked on in puzzled amazement.
      She could not understand how any one so beautiful, so versed in useless literature and useless
      art, any one whom her foolish elder sister foolishly adored, could be anxious and able to make
      herself of use in the world. And even Mary Leigh, in her gentle, ironical way, was astonished
      at Anne’s new vocation, and adored her all the more enthusiastically for it. Mrs Macgregor
      hinted, in her affectionate cynical manner, that Anne was mistaking for a desire to be useful
      to Chough’s children the mere imperious necessity of caring for some one, which was the
      vicarious form of love; and prophesied archly that, once married, Anne would soon be satisfied
      with uselessness. Anne smiled contemptuously at Mrs Macgregor’s theories. Yet she was as
      unaware as was Mrs Macgregor herself, that there was indeed an imperious necessity in her
      nature—a necessity more personal, more selfish, and more
       terrible than her mere desire to be of use. In these four
      months Anne had gradually, and hitherto unconsciously, ceased to love Hamlin as she had
      formerly loved him. Like many of the most powerful and passionate natures, Anne had a fatal
      tendency to love ideally and love the ideal; not so much to invest with unreal qualities the
      object of her passion, but to conceive a passion for an impersonal creation of her own, an
      amalgamation of her own ardent and confused aspirations after an unknown excellence; and then
      to identify the object of this strange intellectual and moral passion with the first real
      person who struck her as excellent and noble and beautiful, or who appealed strongly to her
      sympathies and her gratitude. Of love in the ordinary sense, such a nature is wellnigh
      incapable; and the devotion due to real imperfect creatures, pity and sympathy with weakness,
      the devotion due to a sense of duty, although it may be intense and tender in such people,
      comes only on later, when the first
       splendid idol has been shattered, and whatever passion
      there is must be given, in humbleness or sorrow, to the unsatisfying realities of this world.
      With such a nature and such tendencies, Anne had been met, when young, ignorant, and
      friendless, by an indistinct yet real personality—by Hamlin, who had done for her more than
      any other man had ever done for a woman; and in this vaguely seen Hamlin, known at first only
      as a servant knows the brilliant guest of the house, a model the painter to whom she is
      sitting—and then known at a distance, in letters which were the unreal efflorescence of a
      poet’s mind,—in this vaguely seen Hamlin, to whom she owed her new life, and who was
      surrounded by all the beautiful things and ideas which that new life represented, Anne Brown
      had incarnated the ideal of good and beauty towards which her simple, self‐unconscious,
      energetic soul so strenuously aspired. Such a love as this must be transformed into something
      less exalted, or must die out unsatisfied, whatever the person who
       feels it or the person with whom it is connected: the real,
      however excellent, can never satisfy the craving after the ideal; a living individual can
      never quiet desires which have no individual object, which are mere dumb and violent
      activities of a too powerful soul. But Anne was not the kind of woman in whom simpler and less
      exacting instincts, in whom ordinary love, can gradually supplant such an ideal passion; and
      what was worse, Hamlin was not the man who could substitute for an impossible and
      unapproachable creature of the imagination, a less perfect, but more appealing, more
      attaching, more lovable creature of reality.
No man that ever breathed could have satisfied cravings which were in reality not after a
      man, but after a higher life, a more complete activity, a nobler aim; but Hamlin fell short
      not merely of Anne’s ideal, but also, in many things, even of the reality of Anne herself, and
      of all she could understand and sympathise with. The ecstatic devotion
       had speedily given way in her to a more sober kind of
      admiration and affection; but now, little by little, that also was being invaded, transformed
      piecemeal here and there, by doubt, contempt, and disgust. Anne’s eyes had gradually opened to
      the fact that Hamlin was vain, thin‐skinned, professionally jealous, and afraid of the
      judgment, as he was avid of the praise, of his own inferiors; and that, in the negative line,
      he was without strong likings, enthusiasms, or aspirations; and the negative qualities
      affected her more than the positive ones: to her the coldness of Hamlin’s sympathies was more
      painful than the weakness of his nature. Vaguely and gradually these things had dawned upon
      Anne; and she could no more deny their existence than she could persuade herself that a grey
      English autumn day was brilliant as an Italian summer morning. But of late things had
      happened, like that incident of the suppressed “Ballad of the Fens,” and of the
      self‐slandering sonnets which Hamlin looked upon with such
       complacency, which had given her glimpses into something
      worse than she could well believe in, worse than she had the heart to look into. These she
      cast behind her, thinking of them as little as possible, trying to consider them as
      hallucinations, or at all events, gross exaggerations of her own: she must have misunderstood;
      such things could not be. She tried to settle her love of Hamlin on a real and more solid
      basis. She fully admitted to herself that Hamlin had weaknesses,—the weaknesses which she
      remarked in so many of the men around him,—weaknesses going together with the fine qualities
      of the poet’s nature,—weaknesses which, Anne was beginning to suspect, every one had
      (forgetting that she had not), or at least something equivalent thereunto. She admitted to
      herself that Hamlin was weak; nay, to do so was a sort of relief. That Hamlin should come of a
      family infirm of will and often vicious, that he should have been brought up surrounded by
      vice and violence engendered by weakness; this notion,
       due partly to her own observations, and confirmed by Mrs
      Macgregor’s confidences, explained so much away, and left room for so much: it explained all
      the wretched part of his nature, it left room for all the good, for the gentleness, the
      generosity, the chivalric spirit which had made Anne what she was; and it let her hope, every
      now and then, that better might be in store. For since the evil was merely negative and the
      good so thorough and so positive, surely the good would vanquish the evil. And, looking at the
      people who surrounded Hamlin,—at these vain, weak, unreal poets and artists, at this whole
      school of people who, whatever their private life, affected to live only for selfish enjoyment
      of beauty and selfish interest in sin,—Anne used often to think that Hamlin was in the
      position of a sort of Rinaldo, the noblest of all heroes, degraded into mean sloth by the
      Armida of æstheticism, but requiring only the shrill of the trumpet and the clash of arms from
      the real living world to be redeemed and to show
       himself in his real nobility. She would even exaggerate her
      aversion or contempt for Hamlin’s companions and for his school; the worse they were, the more
      excuse for him; and she would often sit dreaming of the way in which he might be gradually got
      from under their influence, and brought in contact with those stronger, more healthy, or more
      terrible realities, which Anne’s nature, by a kind of occult sympathy, felt in the world all
      round, as the birds and insects will feel the storm which is still invisible beyond the hills,
      but which is coming to purify, and shake, and revive.
And so Anne went on loving and hoping, and believing herself to be happy. But there began to
      be a strange restlessness about her; a desire to be useful, to be perpetually active in
      something, to be always trying to understand, and sympathise, and help—an imperious necessity
      not to be left to her own thoughts (those thoughts which had once been like a
       paradise, in which solitude was the highest bliss). For,
      alone with her own thoughts, Anne was beginning to experience an intolerable sense of
      isolation, and intolerable sense of impotence.
IN this condition of mind Anne was violently impelled towards the two Leigh girls;
      and strongly induced to take an aversion to Edmund Lewis. For the Leighs represented every day
      more and more the influence which was strengthening her, the influence which might revive
      Hamlin; and Edmund Lewis seemed sent as an incarnation of those tendencies which, in her
      belief, had marred the nobility of Hamlin’s nature.
Anne’s unmistakable desire to know what was going on in the striving and suffering world
      outside the strongholds of æstheticism, to help in it to her utmost; to be, what the people
      believing only in beauty and passion could not conceive, responsible,—all this intense
       striving got the better of Marjory Leigh’s prejudices. She
      began to understand that she had found in Anne a zealous lieutenant; nay, after some time, the
      conscientious though somewhat pig‐headed and conceited young philanthropist admitted to
      herself that Anne was a force for work and good which dragged even her along, making her, by
      the influence of her complete unselfishness, self‐unconsciousness, and energy, more ready to
      examine into her own mode of doing things, to sift her vanity from her humanitarianism.
“Anne does make one less conceited,” Marjory one day remarked to her sister, waking up from
      a long reverie—“less conceited and less narrow, I do believe. It’s such a revelation; and
      somehow it makes one feel just a little bit ashamed, to find such honesty and determination in
      an æsthete. After that, people don’t seem to be so hopelessly lost—do they? I fear I must have
      been a rather bigoted sort of brute formerly,” and Marjory pushed her fingers through her
      short, lank
       yellow hair, and looked up at her sister with her childish,
      resolute, defiant face, not yet puzzled by the sad experience of the difficulty of doing good,
      and of the dangerousness of even the wisest theories. Mary Leigh smiled. She was proud of her
      little sister; and she was, in a sort of a way, in love with Anne Brown. Marjory thought her
      rather æsthetic and spiritless, she knew; and Anne was absorbed in her own thoughts; but Mary
      Leigh was one of those girls who can resign themselves cheerfully to being second best, as
      long as they are the best in their power—to be happy in her devotion, even if it be
      unreciprocated; and she was happy, in a subdued way—proud of Marjory and adoring Anne, and
      seeing that the two somewhat unresponsive objects of her love could now appreciate one
      another.
So much for the Leighs. But if their presence at Wotton was a support and a consolation to
      Anne, the presence of Edmund Lewis very soon grew to be a positive source of disgust
      . At first, in his egotistic, silently brow‐beating way, he
      was an interesting visitor. He had travelled and read a good deal, and, in point of fact, knew
      much more about literature than about his own art. His imagination turned easily to the
      terrible; he considered Webster as greater than Shakespeare, and Ford as greater than Webster;
      he had personal experiences of more or less criminal persons, whose acquaintance, for the sake
      of morbid psychology, he had sought, and whose characteristics he had lovingly studied; while
      in reality mild and even milk‐soppish in his habits, he seemed to experience a fascination
      from violence and bloodshed. For a week or so he was decidedly interesting, if not, to Anne
      and her two girl‐friends, attractive. But hostility soon arose. He was a fervid spiritualist,
      and a great adept in mesmerising; his vanity made him see mediums, victims of his will‐power,
      everywhere. He immediately discovered one in Anne, and begged to be permitted to try his
      tricks, as Marjory Leigh called them.
Now, if there was one thing which was more abhorrent to Anne than any other, it was
      spiritualism: averse to mysticism like every Italian; prosaic and common‐sense, perhaps just
      in proportion to the idealism of passion and aspiration, she was impatient of the vulgar
      mysteriousness of modern magic; while at the same time her powerful personality, her austere
      will (which she always recognised as the most precious part of her nature), which took umbrage
      at Mrs Macgregor’s theories of obedience to mere physical passions, was positively insulted by
      the notion of surrender to the perfectly unintellectual will of another. However, she let
      Lewis try. During his performance, as he fixed his green eyes upon her, and made passes with
      his flabby white fingers, Anne felt a loathing as if a slug were trailing over her, but she
      sat unaffected by Mr Lewis’s will‐power, and at last wearied out his patience.
“You resisted!—I felt you resist!” cried Lewis angrily, at the end of the séance.
“There was nothing to resist against,” answered Anne, bluntly; “but had there been, of
      course I should have resisted.”
“Hamlin does not resist,” replied Lewis, with a certain malignant pride. “I can do just
      whatever I choose with Hamlin.”
“I enjoy it,” explained Hamlin; “it’s like the first effects of opium or haschisch. One
      feels one’s self giving way, one’s soul sinking deliciously.”
“Going to sleep, in fact,” corrected Anne.
From that moment Anne felt that Lewis hated her. Yet he was, in a way, fascinated by her
      exotic beauty; he could not make up his mind that so strange and splendid a woman could resist
      him. He never tried to magnetise her again; and he made many drawings of her, curiously
      distorting her expression, sullen, but frank and resolute, into a kind of sombre, morbid
      wistfulness.
“I hate those sketches he does of you,” cried Marjory one day; “nasty things, which make you
      look—I don’t know to express it—
       as if you were neither a man nor a woman, and were in love
      with him.”
Mary Leigh laughed. “The school is running to seed,” she said: “the great men have done all
      that could be done in the way of beautiful suggestiveness—the little ones can only do
      suggestiveness of all sorts of vague nastiness which they don’t even understand. But there’s a
      change coming on in painting; people are beginning to be satisfied with interpreting real
      nature; and—don’t you think—Anne—a similar change . . .”
Mary Leigh, who was the most absent‐minded of Irish enthusiasts, suddenly stopped short. She
      had only just remembered that Hamlin was a poet and a painter of the school which she had just
      described. And a pained, darkened look had come over Anne. Mary Leigh could not understand
      that that look meant that Anne had often thought just the same thing, and that now there
      returned to her, with sickening bitterness, the double
       recollection of the “Ballad of the Fens,” and of those
      twelve sonnets called “Desire.”
Meanwhile Anne gradually got substantial reasons for her instinctive aversion to Edmund
      Lewis. The family of the vicar of Wotton sometimes visited at the Hall. There were two very
      young girls, scarcely more than children, for whom Anne and the Leighs had taken a fancy. One
      afternoon they came to tea, delicate pink‐and‐white creatures of fourteen or fifteen,
      impressionable, nervous, utterly ignorant of the world. Hamlin seemed to appreciate the charm
      of obvious purity and guilelessness which went with their ignorance of the world.
“I should like to make a picture of those two creatures,” he whispered to Anne, as they sat
      at tea in the library, “or to write a poem about them—they seem to do one good; for it is
      good, is it not, to see so much life which is so perfectly fresh, and unsullied, and
      untormented—such a desire to know the world before
       the evil in it is even guessed at—don’t you think?”
Even Chough could not make a single unintelligible allusion to the wife of Claudius or the
      daughter of Alexander VI., but sat with one of his children on his knee, looking at the young
      girls and gently humming a scrap of old minuet, fresh and simple like themselves. Anne could
      not help thinking that she had never been what these girls were. She had been shown the ugly
      things of life, taught to struggle with them since her childhood, and now believing equally in
      good, but believing sadly and bitterly. It was better to be a woman as she was, a woman who
      knew of good and evil, and was prepared to fight her way out of darkness; but still it was sad
      never, never to have been as these girls. Edmund Lewis was leaning forward on the table, his
      reddish‐auburn head with its glittering eyes rising like that of a snake, as if silently
      trying to mesmerise the visitors.
“Suppose we show these young ladies some of our works of art?” he proposed, in a half‐
       jocular way which he occasionally had. The girls had never
      seen any pictures scarcely, and having heard of Hamlin and Lewis as famous painters from
      London, were delighted. The whole party went up to Hamlin’s studio. He showed the girls not
      the things for which he cared most, but what he thought would give them most
      pleasure—magnificent tinted sketches of poetical legends, of the Sleeping Beauty, Cupid and
      Psyche, and so forth. Anne thought she had scarcely ever seen Hamlin so nice before as when he
      got the sketches out of the portfolio, and told the girls what they represented. When he had
      done, Edmund Lewis, with his slow, shuffling movements, placed his large sketch‐book on an
      easel, and turned a page. It was covered with outline drawings of men and women, stark naked,
      in various listless attitudes.
Anne had seen these drawings time after time, and had thought them, accustomed as she was to
      studios and painters, merely clever nude studies, with the usual expression of
       bored depravity of all Lewis’s work. She had criticised the
      drawing and anatomy, and had never before thought that any impropriety was connected with
      them. But now she could not help blushing and feeling vaguely indignant.
“That’s not the sort of thing to show those children,” whispered Mary Leigh, who, heaven
      knows, had seen nude studies enough in her life. Both she and Anne had caught the surprised,
      vacant expression of the two girls, had seen the flush in their face, and understood the
      silence, never asking what it all meant, as they stared at all this emaciated, flabby
      nakedness. And Anne caught also Edmund Lewis’s expression, as he held the corner of the page,
      ready to turn over, with one hand, stroking his reddish‐brown beard with the other, and
      looking, with slightly raised eyebrows and curious green eyes, towards Hamlin, as if to call
      his attention. Lewis turned another page, and another; always the same stark‐naked people.
      Anne was very black. Heaven knows from what instinct, perhaps from a paternal recollection
       of his own little girls, Cosmo Chough understood Anne’s
      look; and edging himself awkwardly into the corner, he banged against the easel, and made it
      and the sketch‐hook come down with a crash.
“Confound your awkwardness!” cried Lewis, stooping to pick up his drawings, and slowly
      replacing the sketch‐book.
“I don’t think they care to see any more,” said Anne; “you see, these young ladies haven’t
      studied anatomy. Supposing you show them your Eastern sketches, Mr Lewis.”
Lewis gave Anne a rapid, angry glance. “The Eastern sketches are up‐stairs,” he said
      snappishly; adding, in his drawling, mock courteous way, “I think these young ladies have seen
      the best I could show them.”
“Then we had better go down‐stairs, and Mr Chough will play an accompaniment, for I know
      they sing very nicely,” said Anne, taking no notice of him.
Perhaps, thought Anne, she might have been prejudiced against Edmund Lewis. He
       did draw morbid‐looking nudities; but so many other men did
      just the same, that it was quite possible he might have displayed that sketch‐book from mere
      thoughtlessness. Yet she could not believe it; she had seen Lewis’s look as he turned over the
      pages, and that look had disgusted her.
The next day but one the question was settled in her mind. It was a fine autumn morning, and
      Anne was seated on the terrace, waiting for the others to come down to breakfast. The air,
      just touched by the first cold, was exquisitely pure; and the sear bracken of the hillside
      opposite sparkled golden with the heavy dew. All round the swallows were whirring about,
      collecting for departure. The thought of the Villa Arnolfini—of the place in the vineyard,
      among the yellowing vines, where she used to sit on the dry warm mint and fennel with the
      little Perrys, where, under the big mulberry‐tree, they had buried her Dante in a heap of
      yellow leaves—came home to Anne. How good Hamlin had been to
       her! the idea almost pained her. But this lovely morning
      seemed to have swept all evil away. If only, Anne said to herself, Hamlin’s sympathies could
      be violently roused—if only he could be awakened suddenly, by some unexpected contact with the
      tragic realities of the world, by a sudden appeal to his generosity and indignation, out of
      this æsthetic day‐dream with its enervating visions of impure beauty and forbidden things. If
      only this could be done, the horrid spell which kept him at a moral distance from her would be
      broken through. . . . And soon it must come, this awakening.
As she was thinking in this way, Edmund Lewis strolled up, his hands behind his back, to the
      table at which she was seated. He gave her a little unceremonious nod, and then, interrupting
      the tune which he was faintly whistling, pushed a paper‐bound book across the table to
      her.
“Have you ever read this, Miss Brown?” he asked; “do you know that passage? I
       think it one of the loveliest things which have ever been
      written.”
Anne’s eye glanced at the page, pencil‐marked all round, and then at the title on the
      margin. It was Gautier’s ‘Mademoiselle de Maupin.’ She understood.
“I have never read it,” she answered, “but I have often heard that it is a book which a man
      does not offer a woman except as an insult,” and she quietly handed the volume back, looking
      up, her beautiful severe face flushed, her slate‐grey eyes flashing, at Lewis.
The painter started.
“Upon my word,” he answered quickly, with his usual self‐possession, “I never thought that.
      I never thought that any book could possibly offend a pure woman nowadays. I regard this book
      merely as a noble hymn to beauty; others may regard it otherwise. I really had no thought of
      offending you, my dear Miss Brown”—there was a tone of patronising insolence in his voice.
“So much the better,” answered Anne, rising.
Oh how, how could Hamlin, with his chivalrous nature, endure the daily contact of such a man
      as this!
“Lewis ought not to have selected those particular drawings to show the vicar’s girls,” said
      Anne, later on. She could not allude to that scene of the book; but she felt she must say
      something. “A man ought not to show such things as those to mere children, brought up in the
      country, who don’t know what they mean, and are merely shocked by such things—don’t you think
      so, Mary?”
“Certainly,” answered Mary Leigh boldly, quite astonished at Anne’s venturing to mention
      such a subject.
“It wasn’t good taste, certainly,” answered Hamlin. “Lewis is fearfully absent‐minded. They
      are lovely designs. But still, it wasn’t good taste, I quite agree.”
“Good taste!” thought Anne, with a shudder. “Is there nothing higher than taste in the
      world?”
THREE days later, Chough and Lewis returned to town, and Hamlin went with them. The
      weather had broken up, and it was time to settle for the winter. Aunt Claudia and Anne were to
      stay on another fortnight, in order to give Hamlin time to make some alterations in the house
      at Hammersmith. Such at least was the pretext; but Anne knew that Madame Elaguine had arrived
      in London, and she guessed that Hamlin would wish to transact whatever business there might
      be, before exposing to Mrs Macgregor’s wrath the Cousin Sacha of former days—before, perhaps,
      refusing to let Anne Brown meet a woman whose past spoke little in her favour, and of whose
      present he knew absolutely nothing.
“How I dread seeing that woman!” he exclaimed the evening before his departure, as he walked
      up and down the hall with Anne, while the rest of the company was listening to Cosmo Chough,
      shrilly piping eighteenth century music in the drawing‐room.
“Has Aunt Claudia ever told you anything of our life when Cousin Sacha was here with us,
      years ago?” he asked.
Anne nodded.
“Aunt Claudia told me the whole story.”
“Then you can understand,” cried Hamlin, almost convulsively, “how the mere thought of Sacha
      is loathsome to me; and yet, I must behave decently towards her—don’t you think?”
“Of course you must; and I can’t help thinking that perhaps—well, that your aunt and you may
      be a little unjust towards her—I don’t think that a child really could be so bad.”
“Oh, a child may be as bad as a woman if she have evil blood in her! and just think, if
       Sacha was like that as a child, what must she not be as a
      woman?”
There was something odd in his tone; something not of indignation, but of a kind of clinging
      curiosity.
“I daresay,” said Anne, “that as a woman she may be much better than as a child. Her eyes
      may have been opened to her own unworthiness, and she may have struggled out of the influence
      of bad examples. I am sure many, many people are much better as men and women than as
      children. To know, to feel responsible, means so much.”
“That may be.” There was some disappointment in Hamlin’s tone.
Anne laughed.
“You want to find a fiend, a lamia, a vampire,” she said—“something hateful and picturesque.
      Fancy if your cousin should turn out a most prosaic and ultra‐respectable woman, given up to
      her children, and coffee‐taverns, and women’s suffrage!”
Hamlin could not help laughing.
“I fear there’s not much chance of that. Anyhow, I must see whether she is fit for you to
      receive, and whether Aunt Claudia can be mollified towards her, supposing she is the exemplary
      piece of prose which you imagine.”
Anne had induced Cosmo Chough to leave his little girls in her charge; and the Leighs were
      to return to London with her and Aunt Claudia. The big house seemed very empty without Hamlin
      and his friends; but the quiet was pleasant. Somehow, when he was away, when she could no
      longer see him perpetually sitting and walking with Edmund Lewis, Anne’s love for Hamlin
      became much stronger. In her recollection he existed only with reference to herself; she felt
      his goodness, she believed in his nobility, she felt sure that some day he would become more
      manly, healthy, and resolute. If only she could enter into his confidence, instead of men like
      Lewis and Dennistoun; if only she could make him see all that there was in the world besides
      mere art and poetry. Perhaps she was unworthy to
       do it. This thought spurred her on, redoubled Anne’s
      restless desire to know, to sympathise, and to help.
Marjory Leigh had, soon after her arrival at Wotton, made acquaintance with the wife of the
      vicar, a simple, energetic, rather narrow‐minded but boundlessly unselfish woman, all whose
      thoughts were given to improving the condition of the neighbouring poor. To tell the whole
      truth, the vicar had a son, a young man entirely belying the usual saying about clergymen’s
      sons, who had renounced a good living in the neighbourhood in order to become a curate in the
      East End of London.
Harry Collett had been at Oxford at the same time as Hamlin; he had even, for some time,
      belonged to the æsthetic set of which Hamlin and Melton Perry had been the heads: but he had
      soon become a religious enthusiast; and, his religious enthusiasm cooling down, he had
      remained an ardent philanthropist. Hamlin had a liking for Harry Collett. He was handsome,
      tall, and emaciated, like a St John
       the Baptist by Donatello; he was in his own style poetical;
      he was a dreamer and an enthusiast. Hamlin used to call him Francis of Assisi. He did several
      sketches of him, and asked him several times to Wotton Hall. Anne also liked and admired him;
      but there was something exaggerated, narrow‐minded, in him, which shocked her Italian
      temperament. What she wanted was secular energy, not priestly devotion.
“He is a monk,” she used to say; “he ought to have lived in the middle ages. What we want
      nowadays are disagreeable, rough‐and‐ready men like Cousin Dick—men who don’t merely feel
      sorry for vice, but who try to understand its scientific reason.”
Marjory Leigh, who declared herself to belong to the most advanced of all advanced parties,
      and to whom Richard Brown was little less than a god, perfectly agreed in Anne’s verdict. But
      being of a proselytising temper, and having a special love for proselytising among the young
      men of her acquaintance, she immediately
       set about enlightening the rather High Church benevolence
      of Harry Collett, as soon as he came to spend at Wotton his summer holidays. Anne and Mary
      Leigh used often to laugh over the intensely serious flirtations which were carried on between
      Marjory and the East End curate—flirtations of which both parties were perfectly
      unaware—earnestly discussing charity reorganisation, ventilation, primary instruction, and so
      forth; but which was nevertheless destined to result, soon after the general return to town,
      in a long engagement between Marjory and Harry Collett. Harry was already back at his post in
      the East End; but Marjory, being unable to discuss philanthropy with him, went daily to help
      his mother in her work. Thus it was that Anne gradually became acquainted with the petty
      miseries of village life, its dull indifference, mistaken by poets for innocence, and beneath
      which lies so much possibility of stupid misery and stupid crime. “All that must be improved
      some day,” Anne used to say; and
       she determined to ask Cousin Dick’s advice, for she
      believed in radical measures rather than in the small palliations of the vicar’s wife.
One afternoon—they were within three or four days of return to London—Marjory Leigh returned
      more than usually excited from a visit to the vicarage.
“What’s the matter?” asked Anne, as the three girls sat alone in Hamlin’s empty studio.
Marjory threw her hat on the floor. “Give me some tea,” she said, “I feel quite sick; I
      never thought I should come across such horrors. Of course,” she added quickly, before Anne or
      her sister had time to exclaim, and as if to reclaim her reputation for omniscience—“of course
      I knew that such things existed—oh dear, yes—in big towns and so forth; but still,”—and poor
      Marjory fairly burst into tears,—“I never, never thought that—I should come so near them.”
Finally, when she had had some tea, Marjory, all blushing and stammering, and in a
       hesitating, roundabout way, which curiously belied her
      usual affectation of cynical omniscience, proceeded to explain what had just happened. A girl
      with an illegitimate baby—a very common occurrence in those parts—had turned up for assistance
      at the vicarage, and, while deprecating the wretched creature’s fault, the vicar’s wife had
      revealed to Marjory Leigh a jealously hidden stain in her parish; namely, that in the hamlet
      to which the girl belonged, a mishap, as she termed it, like hers was a trifle, and indeed
      could scarcely be considered a fault at all, compared with the condition of brutish sin in
      which rolled, cynically huddled together in cabins no better than sties, the whole small
      population of that foul little fen village.
“It appears it’s been going on for generations,” cried Marjory, “and that there’s no hope of
      remedying things unless the miserable creatures be removed into more decent dwellings. It’s
      useless trying to teach them to live decently as long as they live there, in
       those hovels in the fen, where half of them are ill of
      fever every autumn, and they herd together like cattle. Oh, it’s sickening to think of
      Christian people being so sinful close by one!” and Marjory burst into hysterical sobs.
Mary Leigh had exclaimed in horror as soon as Marjory’s meaning had become plain to her.
“Oh, don’t cry, don’t cry, Marjory darling!” she exclaimed, throwing herself on her knees
      and clasping her sister’s waist. “You can’t do anything, my love—and you’ll only
      make yourself ill if you let yourself brood on such things.”
Anne had not exclaimed. She sat perfectly still, and said nothing. Most persons would have
      deemed her very callous, she looked so calm.
“Are you quite sure, Marjory,” she asked, after a minute—“are you quite sure you did not
      misunderstand, or that Mrs Collett did not exaggerate?”
“I couldn’t misunderstand; and Mrs Collett gave me ever so many details—such dreadful
      details;” and interrupted by her sobs, Marjory repeated scraps of what she had heard.
“Where is the place?” asked Anne, after another pause.
“It’s that cluster of houses half‐way to Eggleston, in the middle of the fen, by the
      river—they call it Cold Fremley. Don’t you remember our going down there once in the break,
      with the Spencers and Chough, and your saying you wished Hamlin would paint that sort of fiat
      green country, and Mrs Spencer saying it was unpoetical?”
Anne remembered. The recollection of that moment came like a vision; she saw the wide river,
      between its low sedgy banks of boggy green; the reddish storm sunset reflected in clotted
      flame‐coloured masses in its thick grey waters; the moon rising, a spectral crescent on the
      blue evening sky; she heard the quail of the frogs, the cries of the water‐fowl: the Spencers
      and Chough on ahead with the two
       Leighs and Harry Collett; and she and Hamlin lingering
      behind, watching the reddened stream—and the cattle, dark outlines on the flat green banks
      opposite; Hamlin scrambling down the bank to get a tuft of willow herb growing half in the
      water. She was feeling so happy; Hamlin was so good and gentle and handsome, and she loved him
      so; and they two had stood by the river alone, until the little Spencer children had run back
      and taken her hand, and begun asking a hundred questions in their shrill baby lisp. It was so
      lovely and peaceful and good, this green country, this quiet evening, with Hamlin by her side
      and the children holding her hand. She had felt a painful longing to impress the place and the
      moment on her mind, to keep this happy present. “What is this called?” she had asked; and
      Hamlin had answered “Cold Fremley.” Cold Fremley! Anne went on repeating to herself all that
      afternoon: the recollection of that beautiful scene, become hideous like a nightmare,
       haunted her. The huddled roofs dark in the distance, the
      curl of smoke—that was the place. Anne felt dizzy. She had read enough about shame and sin,
      heaven knows; the poems of the poets of the set were full of allusions to such things. But she
      had never realised that they could be realities; they had been so many artistic dabs of
      horror, imaginary, or belonging vaguely to some distant, dim world, as unreal as the beautiful
      haunted woods and mysterious castles, the pale unsubstantial gods and heroes, and men and
      women of the pictures of Rossetti and Burne Jones, of the poems of Swinburne and Morris, and
      Hamlin and Chough. But that abominations like these should be here, close at hand, in sordid,
      filthy reality, reality under this same sun, swept by this same wind, reality through which
      she had unconsciously walked; this seemed impossible. A strange thing happened: the thought of
      what she had heard haunted her so persistently, loomed before her in such ever‐changing
      horror, that Anne at
       last felt like one drunk or half asleep, and began to doubt
      whether it was not all a horrible nightmare. Had Marjory really told her these things? Before
      a court of justice Anne would have been unable to say whether she had or not. It was so unreal
      to her that she could not accept it as a reality; the more she brooded, the more did it seem a
      hallucination.
“Marjory,” said Anne the next day, suddenly, “is it true that you told me some dreadful
      things which you had heard from Mrs Collett about the people at Cold Fremley?”
Marjory looked up in astonishment.
“Of course it is,”—she had half forgotten it herself.
“I cannot get it out of my mind,” said Anne, passing her hand over her eyes, as if to
      disperse some black mist; “it is too horrible. Everything in the world seems tarnished, don’t
      you know, and a sort of horrible clamminess all round.”
Marjory looked at Anne. She was very pale, and her big, greyish‐blue, onyx‐coloured
       eyes were wide with a fixed stare. She looked as if she did
      indeed see the tarnish on the world, and felt the clamminess; as if, like a person taken with
      some fever, she tasted copper on her tongue.
Marjory was a sensible girl. She had studied medicine, and knew an appalling amount about
      direction of the will, expectant attention, and other psychological and physiological matters.
      “Anne,” she said, “you are making yourself ill about this matter. Of course you couldn’t help
      being shocked; but you take it too much to heart. You are going to let these horrible things
      haunt you; it is a great temptation to do so. Take care; it won’t do any good, and you will
      merely get quite unstrung. I warn you against it. You mustn’t let such things get the better
      of your will: it’s morbid, and dangerous, and unworthy,”—and Marjory completely forgot how she
      herself had entered the room in hysterics the previous day.
Anne took no notice of her speech. “You say nothing can be done until these people be
       given better dwellings?” she asked, after a pause.
Marjory nodded. “So Mrs Collett says, and I’ve read that repeatedly in books also—for, of
      course, such things have happened elsewhere. At all events, the children might be brought up
      to live more decently, if they were not all huddled up together like that.”
A thought seemed to flash across Anne’s darkened mind. Her maid had just brought in the
      tea‐things.
“Laura,” she asked, “do you know to whom Cold Fremley—those cottages by the river, half‐way
      to Eggleston—belongs?”
“I can ask Mr Hamlin’s steward, miss—he’s just in the housekeeper’s room,” answered
      Laura.
“Run and ask,” ordered Anne.
“Good heavens, Anne!” cried Mary Leigh, “what are you going to do! You surely
      aren’t going to talk about such things and try to interfere! What can you do, when Mrs Collett
      has failed?”
“The houses must be rebuilt,” answered Anne, quietly and firmly; “to whomsoever they belong,
      they must—they shall be rebuilt.”
“Nonsense!” cried practical Marjory; “how can you talk like that? Are you going to apply to
      the neighbouring squires and tell them about such matters?”
“They must rebuild the houses if once they understand,” repeated Anne. “I don’t care to whom
      they belong—they shall be rebuilt. I will write and speak to every one and any one on the
      subject, until the thing has been done.”
“It’s all very well, but when it comes to the point, you wouldn’t venture to mention such a
      thing to a man,” cried Marjory, contemptuously—“I—wouldn’t.”
At this moment the maid entered.
“The steward says that Cold Fremley—those houses by the river, leastways—belong to Mr
      Hamlin, and as it’s he that lets them out.”
Marjory and her sister looked at each other and then at Anne, as much as to say, “Well, you
      see now what it would be.” Anne flushed scarlet, but her face brightened.
“I will speak to Mr Hamlin,” she said, as soon as the maid’s back was turned. Her voice
      faltered a little; but it was from sudden surprise, not from hesitation.
“Oh, Annie, dear, you’ll find that you can’t!” exclaimed Mary Leigh; “you’ll find it
      impossible.”
“At all events, you’ll have to put it through your aunt,” suggested Marjory.
“Through Aunt Claudia?” cried Anne. “Do you think she will make him feel it? Why, she will
      answer that such things are going on all round us, and worse ones. No; I shall speak to Mr
      Hamlin himself: he is the proprietor of Fremley; and he is responsible.”
“You’ll never be able to do so,” insisted Mary; “you think you will, but you can’t. Fancy
      saying all that to a man—and to a man who is in love with you!”
“What must be done, must be done,” answered Anne. “It’s not a question of liking or
      disliking. Mr Hamlin’s a man, and I am a woman, and I daresay men and women don’t talk about
      such things. But Mr Hamlin is the proprietor of Cold Fremley, and that’s all I have to do
      with.”
The Leighs looked at her with incredulous astonishment. It seemed so simple to her.
IT was raining when they arrived in London—a warmish, brown, clammy autumn day. The
      streets were a porridge of liquid mud, whose trail dragged along the wet asphalt; the houses
      were staring forth, a livid dirt‐grey, in the thin rain; and the sky, the very rain, was
      befouled with grime. Only drays splashed through the mud, and carriages carrying
      hurried‐looking people; children, still in their tattered summer cottons and battered straw
      hats, stared in at the shops, the broad sheen from whose brilliant windows was caught up by
      the wet pavement, and lingered out, in broken reflections, in the brown ooze of the
      thoroughfare. Along the deserted suburban streets every second house seemed to be a
       gin‐palace, with shining coloured globes, and stucco
      pinnacles soaked with rain, and ground‐glass windows shining out like a leprosy of white. Mrs
      Macgregor closed her eyes in disgust. Even the maid looked depressed. But Anne stared out of
      the window of the carriage at all the hideous soppy sordidness, which seemed to soil and soak
      black into one’s mind; and she felt glad. All this was reality: it was the world in which lay
      her redemption, and the redemption of Hamlin.
Anne found Hamlin full of his cousin Sacha, upon whom he had already called three times, and
      in whom, to his surprise, he had found not a trace of the child whom he had hated; but a
      respectable, unworldly young mother, devoted to her children, timid, and only deserving a
      little sympathy.
“She is a very curious woman,” he said, “evidently excellent at bottom; but I don’t know
      whether I quite like her. She has something very strange about her,—handsome; and at the same
      time—I don’t know exactly
       what it is—charming, but not quite reassuring. I am so
      anxious for you to see her.”
“I am so awfully glad she’s nice,” exclaimed Anne. “Do you know, she weighed upon me like a
      nightmare after all Aunt Claudia had said. It seemed too horrible that such a creature should
      exist; and I felt sure it was all prejudice against the poor little thing.”
“Don’t be in such a hurry,” laughed Hamlin; “perhaps you won’t like her after all. There is
      something uncanny about her, decidedly.”
“I’m sure that’s all your imagination. You’re always thinking that things are uncanny: it
      comes of writing too much about proud, pale, evil women, and that sort of nonsense.”
Anne felt really glad. That the terrible Cousin Sacha, the fiend‐child of Wotton Hall,
      should turn out a respectable, unworldly young woman, devoted to her children, seemed to her
      like the first breaking of the spell which hung over Hamlin. She felt no jealousy of Cousin
      Sacha; for, as Hamlin spoke of Madame Elaguine, it was obvious that if he was anxious to
       show her to Anne, he was equally impatient to display his
      beautiful ward to her, who had evidently been told a great deal about her already.
The next day Madame Elaguine was to call on Anne. Mrs Macgregor took the announcement in a
      spirit of sombre defiance. “She may come,” she said, “but I will not see her. What o’clock is
      the creature coming?”
“Four,” answered Hamlin.
“Very well; then I’ll order the brougham for half‐past three, and go and make some calls.
      Anne may stay behind if she likes.”
Accordingly, at half‐past three, Mrs Macgregor rolled off in the brougham to Mrs
      Argiropoulo’s, and to various other people whom she declared she hated. At four o’clock Hamlin
      came up‐stairs from his studio, and Anne gave him some tea. “She will be here in a minute,” he
      said.
There was a noise of wheels; Anne felt her hand tremble as she poured out a second cup for
      Hamlin.
“There! I’ve gone and spilt it on your cuff!
       Isn’t it idiotic of me to feel flurried about seeing your
      cousin?”
But the wheels passed on. More wheels, which also passed; rings and knocks; but no Madame
      Elaguine. Hamlin, at every false alarm, got up and looked at Anne—a long, admiring look at her
      stately figure and her strange pale face, with the overhanging masses of crimp black hair; at
      the splendid postures, of which only Michelangelo seemed to have ever understood the
      magnificent weary weightiness into which she naturally fell.
“She is evidently not coming,” he said with some irritation, as the clock struck five; “it’s
      too bad, keeping one in for nothing, like this!”
“I didn’t want to go out with Aunt Claudia; and I don’t see how you could have gone on
      painting after dark.”
“Still it is too annoying.”
“I daresay it’s not so easy to go paying visits at Hammersmith when one has children to
      attend to.”
“Bother the children! she might leave them to a nurse.”
At that moment a cab stopped, and there came a knock.
“That’s she!” cried Hamlin, and he ran down‐stairs.
Madame Elaguine entered; in the dusk Anne could scarcely see her face: she was rather below
      the average height, but so slender that she looked tall; there was something very shy about
      her, and Anne could understand her shyness.
“I am so glad you have come,” she said; “we had almost given you up.”
“I fear I am very late—perhaps in your way,” said Madame Elaguine; “the fact is, I had to
      take my little girl to choose a doll, and she took nearly an hour about it,” and she laughed a
      little shy laugh. She had a beautiful voice, high and silvery, and yet warm and caressing,
      like a child’s, which inevitably made you think of delicate green leaves, and fields whitened
      with budding clover, and all sorts of young and tender things. She
       was very thin, almost emaciated, and with a slight droop of
      the head: it was too dark for Anne to see her features distinctly, but she seemed pretty, and
      frail, and wasted. There was something in that childish voice which touched Anne; her strong,
      rebellious disbelief in the horrible Sacha of Mrs Macgregor came indignantly to her.
“It is very good of you to let me come and see you,” said Madame Elaguine, after some
      trifling conversation, “and very good of my cousin to propose it; because,” and her voice, in
      a sudden outburst of frankness, became just a little tremulous, “Walter must have a very
      painful recollection of me. It was a very unhappy time when we were last together, and I often
      think with shame of what I was then—what a wretched, badly brought up, bad‐hearted child I
      was.”
“If you had been a bad‐hearted child,” cried Anne, “you could not be what you are now, you
      could not speak as you do now. I don’t believe it.”
Madame Elaguine sighed.
“At all events,” she said, “the question now is no longer what I was or what I am, but what
      my children are to be. I am played out; I only hope I may live to see them on the road to
      being happier and more useful creatures than I have been.”
There was something in that clear soft voice, with its just perceptible daintiness of
      Russian pronunciation, making the English words not less English, but more distinct and
      liquid, which made what from any one else might have seemed strange, quite natural and
      simple.
“You have come to settle in England?” asked Anne.
“Yes; at least if it is possible for me ever to settle anywhere. I have been a rolling stone
      so long, or rather such a feather carried hither and thither by the wind, that I can scarcely
      believe in settling anywhere; and then, perhaps, I may not be permitted to stay where I should
      be happy. But I want my boy to become an Englishman, and at the
       same time I haven’t the heart to let him go away from
      me.”
“Why should you not settle?” asked Anne; “surely you will be much happier near your
      child.”
“Why may I never do what I wish?” exclaimed Madame Elaguine, with a curious wildness; “why
      may I not be left to live in peace like any other insignificant woman, whose life has been a
      failure? I am not my own mistress.”
“Bring lights,” ordered Hamlin, who had summoned the servants. He was impatient that the two
      women should see each other, impatient to display to his cousin the magnificent creature which
      belonged to him.
They had begun discussing various school‐plans for Madame Elaguine’s children when the lamps
      were brought in. Anne was surprised when she saw Hamlin’s cousin distinctly; she had imagined
      her pretty and delicate in an ordinary way, but there was nothing commonplace about this
      woman. She was pale, and of almost ghastly thinness, and
       her features, despite her small size, were large, and
      perhaps a little gaunt. It struck Anne that she had seen a face like that before, and later
      she discovered that what Madame Elaguine made her think of was Sarah Bernhardt in one of her
      girlish parts, or as her face looked under the little cap of Coppée’s page‐boy. It was a
      charming, frank, worn, yet childish face, full of movement,—a face which seemed to vibrate
      like a delicate instrument—not exactly beautiful nor exactly lovable, but interesting and
      fascinating. It seemed to Anne that she could perfectly understand the past of this woman: a
      highly nervous, delicate nature, not earnest but passionate, easily turned into the very best
      or the very worst; and she felt more than ever indignant at the thought of the corruption in
      contact with which this mobile impressionable creature had come as a child,—at the thought of
      all the unintentional shame which this woman must look back upon in her childhood.
While they were talking, Sacha Elaguine
       was equally busy looking at Anne; and Anne puzzled her.
“Either a volcano or an iceberg, or both,” said the little Russian to herself, as she looked
      at Anne’s solemn, unruffled, and yet tragic beauty.
At that moment a carriage stopped at the door. Hamlin went to the window. He looked rather
      pale and puzzled as he came back.
“Let me show you my studio, Sacha,” he said hurriedly; “we can get there quickest by a
      little back‐stair out of the library. Will you come?”
Anne understood. Mrs Macgregor, who had gone out expecting Madame Elaguine to come an hour
      earlier, had returned, and Hamlin dreaded a scene. But Madame Elaguine understood also.
“Your aunt has returned,” she said; “yes, I’m sure she has—that’s why you want to hide me
      away; you are afraid of a scene . . .”
Hamlin hesitated; but Madame Elaguine
       seemed to pin him down with her rapid glance.
“Well, yes,” he said; “what’s the use of mincing matters? You know how unreasonable Aunt
      Claudia always was, and what a prejudice she had against you.”
“And has still; I can believe it. But look here,” and the little emaciated creature rapidly
      stopped Hamlin as he was raising the curtain into the next room—“I am not going to be hid
      away. Your aunt has every reason to hate me, and to be angry at finding me here. But I am not
      coming into her house on the sly—I won’t be hidden away. Your aunt may say what she likes to
      me, but she shall see me here.”
“I think Madame Elaguine is quite right,” said Anne, though she knew full well what sort of
      reception Mrs Macgregor was likely to give to the detested Sacha. “I quite understand her
      feeling.”
“But you are not coming into Aunt Claudia’s house on the sly,” insisted Hamlin. “In the
       first place, this house is not Aunt Claudia’s house, but
      Miss Brown’s house. Aunt Claudia, like you and me, is merely Miss Brown’s guest, and you have
      come to see Miss Brown. In the second place, my aunt knew you were coming, and went out
      expressly to avoid meeting you.”
Madame Elaguine listened with a slight look of contempt.
“So much the better if I am not intruding behind her back. And it is very considerate of Mrs
      Macgregor to save me what she knows must be a painful scene. But besides Mrs Macgregor, I have
      myself to think of. I wish to see your aunt. I wish to have the satisfaction of telling her,
      that however much she may hate the remembrance of me, she cannot hate it more than I do.”
There was something theatrical in this which took Hamlin by surprise; but it was the
      theatricalness of a quixotic and passionate temper, and Anne liked Madame Elaguine for it.
“I want to see Mrs Macgregor,” repeated
       the Russian; “but I don’t want to inflict it upon you, Miss
      Brown. Indeed I fear it is very ill‐bred and very selfish of me to come to your house merely
      to make a disagreeable scene: still I can’t resist the desire,” and she shook her little head
      with its close pale‐yellow curls and deep brown eyes, “only—don’t stay —just tell your aunt
      that I am here, and that I want to see her.”
“I will go and tell Aunt Claudia,” said Anne.
But as she spoke, Mrs Macgregor entered. The old lady was short‐sighted; and in that room,
      where the light, concentrated on a few spots, left all the more shadow all round, she did not
      at first notice the presence of a stranger.
“Well, is she gone?” she asked savagely.
“Madame Elaguine is here, Aunt Claudia,” answered Anne, quietly.
“Here!” exclaimed Mrs Macgregor—“ still in this house!”
“And she has remained,” went on Anne, with a weighty coldness which often put
       down the old lady’s ebullitions, “because she wants to see
      you again.”
Hamlin was standing by the piano. How he wished his cousin at the devil for inflicting such
      a scene upon him!
“The insolence!” muttered Mrs Macgregor.
But Madame Elaguine had come forward and stretched out her hand.
“I could not come here without seeing you, Aunt Claudia,” she said, in her clear voice. “I
      want to tell you that, badly, as I behaved as a child, and cruelly unjust though you were
      towards me, I bear you no ill‐will, and only wish to ask for your forgiveness.”
She had sat down opposite to Mrs Macgregor. Hamlin’s aunt scanned her from head to foot; she
      was taken by surprise, shaken throughout her nature, and at a loss how to answer.
“So you are Sacha Polozoff,” said Mrs Macgregor at length, slowly. “I know all the fine
      trash which Anne talks about the woman not being the same as the child—
       maybe; I hope so, for your sake. As to forgiveness, you
      have mine: but forgiveness is only an empty word; it does not cancel what has been done,
      neither from the memory of God nor of man. Here; I forgive you, and take it for
      what it is worth.”
And she stretched out her hand with a bitter smile.
Madame Elaguine stooped down and kissed that shaking old hand.
“Whatever your forgiveness is worth, I take it joyfully; it cannot undo the past, and it
      cannot put an end to injustice and hatred,—so far it is worthless. But to me it gives a new
      life, because I have been able at last to ask forgiveness, to admit all the mischief I have
      ever done, and to cast away the faults of my childhood from my own clean self,”—she spoke very
      low, and with tears in her voice, but with passion and pride.
“I am happy that you feel so comfortable,” replied Mrs Macgregor, “and that I have been
      conducive thereto. I am happy also to make
       your acquaintance, Madame Elaguine, and I hope you will not
      deprive my nephew and niece of your society on my account.”
Sacha bowed; the insult seemed to trickle off her. Anne half wondered, half admired. She
      could not in the least understand the kind of character which prompted such a useless and
      hollow ceremony as this; but as to Madame Elaguine, this solemn act of self‐humiliation seemed
      necessary and just; she admired her for having the courage to carry out her intention.
“Good‐bye,” said Madame Elaguine, as Anne accompanied her into the anteroom. “I must beg
      your forgiveness a thousand, thousand times for having made a scene in your house. You see, I
      am a badly brought‐up woman: I was never taught to do anything except what I liked; and I am
      what I am, and must say what I feel.”
Her tone was very appealing.
“Will you forgive me, Madame Elaguine,” said Anne, in her earnest, solemn way, “if I
       tell you, what it is perhaps a liberty to tell you, that I
      have always thought my aunt very unjust towards you?”
The little thin woman looked up in Anne’s face.
“You are good,” she said. “Will you give me a kiss?”
Anne stooped down and kissed her shyly on her wan cheek. But a sort of shudder passed
      through her as her own lips touched that hot face, and grazed the light hair, which seemed to
      give out some faint Eastern perfume. This woman was so unlike anything she had ever seen—so
      unlike her own simple self.
“You will come and see me—and see my children—won’t you?” asked Madame Elaguine. “I think it
      will do me good to know you.” She was very excited, and she gasped as if her heart were
      beating like bursting.
“I will come with Mr Hamlin,” said Anne.
“She is a strange creature,” said Hamlin, as he followed Anne up‐stairs from the door.
      “Didn’t I tell you she was uncanny?”
“I don’t see anything uncanny about her. She is very nervous and excitable—very Russian, I
      should say—and accustomed always to follow her impulses; but I think she is a brave little
      woman.”
“I can’t make her out. Did you notice her mouth? it looks as if it would bite: and she has
      strange eyes; one looks into them, and finds she has merely drawn out one’s soul without
      showing her own.”
Anne laughed. “Poor little woman! Fancy what her feelings would be if she ever knew all
      that! I wonder, by the way, whether you ever thought me strange, and told people that I had. a
      mouth which would bite, and eyes in which you get drowned?”
“I always thought,” answered Hamlin, looking at Anne, and seeing her again in that
      close‐fitting white bodice, with rolled‐up sleeves, bending her magnificent head over the
      iron‐board in the little nursery, with frescoes of blue skies, and blue seas, and ducks, and
      people in boats, at the Villa Arnolfini—“I always
       thought that you had something strange in you, Miss Brown;
      some terrible thing to do or to suffer in the future; some great passion or action—I don’t
      know clearly what, but something heroic; and I think so now—”
Anne smiled; but she took his words to heart, for somehow that same impression which he said
      he had received from her face she had had vaguely in her heart.
“I hope the strangeness may consist in being a tolerably well‐behaved and useful young
      woman,” she said, “and—a tolerably grateful one.”
“I WONDER whether Anne Brown has really spoken about that Cold Fremley business to
      Mr Hamlin,” remarked Marjory Leigh to her sister one day, soon after their return to town.
       “I think she’ll never do it, after all.”
“I don’t see how she can,” answered Mary; “at least I can’t conceive doing such a thing. But
      I don’t think we must judge Anne by ourselves: when once she thinks something ought to be
      done, she is quite capable of forcing herself to do it. Anne is quite unlike any one
      else.”
“Fiddlestick!” cried Marjory; “you don’t know anything about women, Mary.”
But despite her sister’s superior knowledge of womankind and of everything else, Mary
       Leigh was in the right; perhaps in some cases enthusiastic
      admiration gives a better clue to action than mere common‐sense. Anne really was made in such
      a way that when once she was persuaded that any course was the right one, no dislike which she
      might have to it, no thought of being considered queer, or improper, or quixotic, could
      restrain her from it. The thing became none the pleasanter to do; but it was done
      unflinchingly: indeed there was in Anne an almost destructive quality of will, a power of
      ruthlessly cutting through all obstacles, the passing consciousness of which, joined with the
      consciousness of the many disagreeable things which it might at any moment force her to go
      through, produced in her a curious kind of pessimism, which, while it recognised the evil of
      the world, made that very recognition an incitement to struggle for good. Anne had made up her
      mind that Hamlin must have the horrible condition of his Cold Fremley tenants explained to
      him. She fully appreciated the unseemliness, the painfulness
      , of such a revelation coming from her; but as there
      appeared to be no one else who could satisfactorily make it to him, it must be made by her.
      “It is very simple,” she said to herself: and this was the most characteristic remark that
      Anne could ever make; for it is curious how very much simpler life does become to people who
      are in the habit of acting without regard for their own feelings.
But it was, though simple, difficult, not on her own account, but on Hamlin’s. In the first
      few days after her return from Wotton, she had several times been on the point of broaching
      the subject, but she had desisted on noticing the absolute want of seriousness in Hamlin’s
      manner, the æsthetic vagueness and fickleness of his thoughts. “He will do nothing practical
      in this mood,” she said to herself; and as, time after time, she watched for a propitious
      moment without finding it, Anne became painfully aware, as one becomes aware of some
      deficiency in a valued piece of property only when it is pointed out, of Hamlin’s
       want of seriousness, of his utter want of any habit of
      asking himself about his responsibilities, or indeed of thinking about anything except himself
      and the beautiful and weird things which delighted him.
“Perhaps it is cowardice on my part,” Anne suddenly thought; “perhaps I find that he is not
      fit to attend to the subject because I dislike mentioning it.” So it must be done at once.
      Hamlin, she knew, was alone in his studio; he must have finished his afternoon’s work, or very
      nearly, and there was no Chough, or Lewis, or Dennistoun on the horizon. So Anne closed the
      piano at which she had been practising some of Chough’s favourite old music, and went
      down‐stairs. She had made up her mind; but, as she went slowly to the studio, she felt her
      heart begin to flutter and to beat, and a cold perspiration to start out in her forehead. For
      all her familiarity with the æsthetic world, in whose apprehension, as Thaddy O’Reilly’s
      Yankee friend had quietly remarked, “right or wrong don’t exist,”—for
       all her habit of reading poems in which every unmentionable
      shamefulness was used as so much vermilion or pale‐green or mysterious grey in a picturesque
      and suggestive composition,—Anne had retained a constitutional loathing for touching some
      subjects, which was like the blind instinctive horror of certain animals for brackish water or
      mud. When Marjory Leigh had first taken her into her confidence, and told her of the pools of
      sin which stagnated among the starving, unwashed, and unlettered million, Anne had recoiled,
      and felt a sort of momentary horror for Marjory, a sort of resentment at this foulness thus
      obtruded on to her; and this feeling, which would sometimes still recur while talking with her
      philanthropic friend, was perhaps the thing in all her life of which Anne was the most
      profoundly ashamed. The æsthetes all round her would let all the world rot away in physical
      hideousness rather than have that physical hideousness put before their eyes; and she, was she
      not even worse, in her cowardly horror of seeing moral wounds
       and leprosies? So Anne argued with herself; and she would
      now face anything; but the feeling of moral sickness was there, however bravely she might look
      at evil, and try and help to remedy it.
“I am a base creature,” Anne thought as she felt her heart fluttering as if it would break
      loose, as she stood and knocked at the studio door.
“Come in,” cried Hamlin.
He thought it was the servant, for at first he did not turn round, but continued writing at
      a beautiful, fantastically inlaid desk in a corner.
“It’s I,” said Anne.
He started up to meet her.
“How sweet of you to come, Madonna Anna!” he said, beaming; “I was just wanting so much to
      see you—I don’t know why—a sort of silly, nostalgic wish. It’s ridiculous to be nostalgic
      about a person who is on the first floor, when I am on the ground floor, isn’t it? and yet it
      is so. I was feeling quite an over‐
       powering desire to see you. And you seem to have felt it,
      through the ceiling, carpets and all, don’t you?”
Anne smiled faintly, but her heart sank.
“I also wanted you to see how I have been getting on with my Beatrice,” he said, and rolled
      an easel into the middle of the room. Anne stood for a moment before the almost
      Giorgionesquely magnificent picture, looking vaguely at the well‐known lady—with those
      strange, half‐classic, half‐Semitic, and yet a little Ethiopian, features, those wide grey
      eyes, that pent‐roof of crisp, lustreless, black hair, those hollowed cheeks and tragic lips
      which had by this time become so familiar to the artistic world of London. It never seemed to
      her that this could have anything to do with her, this sombre, mystic, wistful woman of
      unreality. But she was not thinking of that; she stood at the picture, but almost without
      seeing it.
Hamlin was standing a little aside, looking from her to the picture, and from the picture
       to her, and humming the lines from Dante’s sonnet, which
      Chough had set to music— “Ch’ogni lingua divien tremando muta,Egli occhi non ardiscon di guardare.” “Certainly,” he said to himself, “Dante had not a better Beatrice than this.”
“I want to speak to you, Mr Hamlin,” said Anne, suddenly turning round.
Something in her voice took him by surprise.
“So much the better,” he said, pulling forward a heavy arm‐chair, covered with old‐fashioned
      green brocade.
Anne sat down. How was she to begin? She had intended to prelude with some sort of apology
      for entering on such a subject; but, somehow, now she could not apologise.
“Do you remember a hamlet near Wotton, close by the river, called Cold Fremley?” asked Anne,
      slowly.
Hamlin had just caught a look which he wanted for his picture, and he had taken up his
      painting things.
“Yes,” and he looked up from his palette in
       Anne’s pale face, with the almost monochrome faint‐red lips
      and the delicately hollowed cheeks. “What about it? I remember it quite well. Oh yes, a lovely
      spot; and we went there one evening together.”
“Just so; well, it appears that this hamlet, or rather group of six or seven cabins, belongs
      to you—is part of the Wotton property.”
“Is it? I didn’t know that. Fancy my being the unsuspecting proprietor of such a lovely
      place! I am so glad; I want to write a poem about it one day.”
“And it appears,” went on Anne, carefully steadying her voice, but keeping her eyes on the
      little cypress‐trees and conventional anemones of the Persian rug under her feet—“it appears
      that the condition of the people who live in those houses is very, very horrible; the cabins
      have barely more than one room, into which the whole family is piled.”
“Loathsome!” cried Hamlin, with a shudder, “and in such a lovely spot. Do you remember the
      thick clotted masses of the river dragging
       between the meadow‐sweet and willow‐herb?”
“It is very loathsome,” went on Anne, a coldness coming all over her. “’The
      people are very wretched, poor, always ill of fever, with no more sense of right and wrong
      than cattle.”
“Very dreadful indeed,” said Hamlin, mixing his paints. “Of course nothing can be
      done—nothing ever can, you know—”
“Something can and must be done!” cried Anne. “It appears that in consequence of this utter
      wretchedness and ignorance, and especially on account of the degrading effect of being all
      huddled together, men and women, boys and girls, all of them, in one room which is bedroom,
      kitchen, sitting‐room, everything at the same time,—it appears that these miserable creatures
      have gradually come to live worse than animals; they grow, and let their children in turn grow
      up in horrible, shameful sin.” The difficulty of saying it had vanished; Anne felt that,
      whether she would
       or would not, it must come out. Her voice had kept steady,
      but died out in terrible hoarseness; and her wide‐opened eyes fixed themselves upon
      Hamlin.
Hamlin let his hand with the palette drop on his knee, and listened with deep attention.
      “How very strange!” he said; “how very strange—how tragic!”
“It is tragic,” cried Anne. “Oh, I think nothing in the wide world can be more
      tragic! What is the murder of the body to this? or what is any crime which one man can commit
      towards another, compared with men and women being pushed into wickedness by mere external
      circumstances, being condemned without knowing it, mere blind, indifferent creatures, to
      befoul their souls in this way?”
Anne had not the slightest thought of being eloquent, but she was, not only in her words,
      but in her face and look. Hamlin appreciated it; he was struck. Such a view of evil and of
      fate had never presented itself to him; he recognised how much newer and grander it
       was than the usual platitude about fatal passion in which
      he and his school had indulged.
“Are you quite sure of this?” he asked, with some interest.
“Mrs Collett gave one of the Leighs all the details of it. If you would go to her, she would
      tell you all about it; she has been afraid, ashamed of mentioning it to you, so I have done
      it. But if only you would speak to Mrs Collett now, she would explain to you exactly that
      ought to be done.”
Hamlin did not seem to attend.
“It is awfully grand,” he mused—“all the grander for the utter unconsciousness,
      involuntariness. It would make a splendid subject for a poem. I always felt there must be
      something in that county which should correspond to the tragic look of everything. So much
      Dennistoun’s notion that there isn’t anything poetical or terrible in reality.”
A sickening fear came over Anne. But she drove it from her: she tried to say to herself
       that she had expected this; that Hamlin, being unaccustomed
      to any serious thought of the evil of others, and being a poet, would at first take things in
      this way.
“Mrs Collett says that there is hope of saving these miserable creatures by building better
      dwellings for them; trying to turn Cold Fremley into a village, and setting up a school. I
      have been thinking over it a great deal myself. Of course I’m very ignorant. But I’ve heard
      that the river ought to be valuable for water‐power, because there is no other one near; so I
      thought the simplest would be to try and induce some one—or do it yourself—to set up a factory
      there. That would give the people work, and give them ideas of decent living, and then a
      school would have to be opened.”
The word factory seemed to sear into Hamlin’s nerves.
“A factory on that river? on my property? to befoul all that pure and exquisite country with
      smoke and machine refuse!” he cried indignantly.
“One single factory need not befoul anything,” said Anne, sternly. “And all the smoke and
      machine refuse in the wide world could not make that neighbourhood one‐hundredth part as foul
      as it is made by the sin of Cold Fremley. No, not one‐thousandth part as foul as our own
      hearts, if we let such an evil exist under our eyes.”
Hamlin seemed moved and puzzled.
“It is very dreadful,” he mused. “I really had no notion that such things go on
      nowadays. One is apt to think the world much more commonplace than it is. I will go to Cold
      Fremley some day soon. I’ll take Lewis with me, he’ll be very much interested in it. I
      daresay,” he added, “that there’s a great deal of exaggeration about it. But as to the
      factory, I consider it would be against my conscience to permit such a thing: there is no
      greater pollution in England than factories; thank Heaven, there are as yet few in our county;
      and I would rather die than spoil that beautiful peaceful bit of ground.”
Against this Anne felt it useless to struggle.
“Since you will not hear of the only plan which would easily improve the condition of those
      people,” she went on, “let us leave the factory alone; it is not necessary: a few hundred
      pounds will amply pay for improving, enlarging the six or seven houses of which Cold Fremley
      consists. As to draining, every one says that were that county drained, it would amply repay
      the expense by the superior quality of the crops. All that is wanted for the present,”
      invocated Anne in despair, “is that the people should have more room—that they should not herd
      like cattle—that the growing children, at least, should not be forced into contact with all
      that vice. And all that can be gained by merely enlarging the cottages.”
“Such a thing as you suggest would—besides being, in my opinion, perfectly useless—involve a
      very heavy expense,” answered Hamlin, coldly.
“Not more,” cried Anne, blazing up—“not
       more than you have been at in educating me, Mr Hamlin!”
The words were scarcely out of her mouth when she repented of them.
“Perhaps,” she added sullenly, “that also has been a waste.”
Hamlin did not answer; he was taken by surprise, embarrassed.
“The cases are wholly dissimilar. The left hand may not ask the right hand what it has or
      has not been able to do.”
“What do you mean, Mr Hamlin? If you have been spending more than you can afford on me—oh,
      don’t think I’m not grateful—but please, please, spend no more. This house might be sold. You
      don’t live in it after all, and Aunt Claudia would be just as happy at Wotton. The house and
      furniture must be worth a good deal, and then there is the expense of housekeeping in London.
      Do think of it. I am sure you could raise money enough in that way.”
“This house is not mine, Miss Brown,”
       answered Hamlin, quietly; “it was bought out of your
      capital; and the expenses you mention are paid out of your income, not mine.”
He had wasted all this on her, and the people on his estate lived in foul, sinful hovels! A
      strange gratitude, mixed with horror, overcame Anne; all the beautiful things about her,—her
      beautiful fantastic dress, which Hamlin always designed for her, her knowledge and
      good‐breeding,—all that had been paid for with that money, became loathsome to her.
“It is not mine—not mine; I am a mere beggar living off your charity,” she exclaimed—“living
      off what I have no right to, what ought to go to them—to those poor sinful
      creatures at Cold Fremley. Oh, Mr Hamlin, sell this house, sell the furniture, all, all.
      Enough has been done for me; I don’t want all these beautiful things in order to be happy; I
      could be happy anywhere, doing anything, if I knew that there was one evil the less in the
      world. If there did not remain enough to live upon, I could go out as a governess, or a
       schoolmistress. I have learned quite enough to do
      that—indeed I am in earnest—I should be perfectly happy gaining my bread as I used to. Only
      let something be done for those people—don’t let me feel that every lovely thing I look at,
      every beautiful thing I hear, every word you say, every pleasure I feel, is as sinful as those
      sinful lives!”
Hamlin smiled; he admired and disbelieved; but what a magnificent woman she was! what
      passion, what fervour under that cold exterior!
“There is no need for that,” he said gently, looking at Anne with admiring and loving eyes.
      “I am not so poor as that, and I would starve rather than see you deprived of any single thing
      to which you have a right.”
“Then you will go to Cold Fremley? You will see about it?” He was good and generous at
      bottom—she knew it; and she could have fallen on her knees and cried like a child with her
      head upon his arm.
“I will go to Cold Fremley,” he answered
       with alacrity. “I want to go there. I want to study the
      whole matter—”
“What do you want to study it for?” asked Anne, suddenly and terribly; “to improve matters,
      or—to write a poem?”
“I do wish to write a poem,” answered Hamlin, who felt no shame for doing so, and resented
      being thus reproved. “Certainly I wish to write a poem. You made such a fuss about my tearing
      up that ‘Ballad of the Fens’—well, I now see my way to making use of all the best parts of it,
      and with a real tragic and passionate motive. As to improving matters, I will look about me.
      But I totally disbelieve in the utility of giving these people better dwellings. Of course,”
      he went on gently, but with that tone of knowledge of the evil of the world which Anne so much
      hated—“of course you, who are pure and upright, who cannot conceive the reality
      of lust and the fascination of evil—you can never understand the hold which evil
      has in this world; you cannot understand that the passion for sin may
       exist as there exists in you the passion for good; that
      most men receive in their father’s blood, in their mother’s milk, the haschisch of sinful
      desire,—that the more they grow, the more it grows in them—that it is their very life, and is
      perpetually seeking for aliment. Evil is; it cannot be stamped out.”
Hamlin’s eyes sparkled, and he spoke with a flush; but there was no excitement, no horror in
      his tone. Anne felt that he was reciting in prose what he would soon write in verse.
“In short,” she said, “you think the sinfulness of the people of Cold Fremley fits very well
      into the landscape? You think it, as you said, very picturesque and grand?”
Hamlin was a man who could not easily keep at high moral tension.
“Well, yes,” he answered; “of course it is very shocking, and if anything could
      be done, why, I should be glad. But I know nothing can be done; and although it
      is very much to be regretted, yet I don’t think you can deny
       that there is something very grand and tragic in this sin
      flowering like evil grasses in that marsh.”
“I see,” said Anne, faintly—everything seemed to be turning all round her; “good‐bye.”
“You mustn’t be angry with me,” said Hamlin, following her to the studio door. “You see I,
      unfortunately, have much more experience of life and evil than you will ever have. I know that
      fatality of sin; and that makes me take things in a different way from how you take them.”
Hamlin’s voice sounded faint and distant to Anne, hollow like an echo in a whispering
      chamber. She went mechanically up‐stairs; she did not know how she felt, but everything seemed
      surrounded by thick, clammy horror; the world was going to pieces. When she had shut the door
      of her room behind her, she threw herself with her face on her bed, and burst into an agony of
      half‐audible sobs. But when at length hours passed, and the maid
       came to ask whether she would come to tea, Anne felt no
      better; a black despair weighed upon her. On her dressing‐table stood a Japanese jar, filled
      with delicate autumnal roses; they had the pallor, the diaphanous purity which the frost gives
      to flowers, as approaching death gives it sometimes to human creatures. Anne looked at them;
      and then, without passion or excitement, she took them out of the vase, and threw them into
      the fire. She watched the petals shrivel and fall to black dust on the flame, and the leaves
      and stalks turn slowly, with a hissing noise, into glowing embers. Then she felt ashamed. The
      poor flowers were pure—they at least were clean—and she had destroyed them. And Anne buried
      her head in her hands, and began to sob once more.
THE Leigh girls never discovered which of them was in the right; and as Anne never
      made any further allusion to Cold Fremley, they concluded that she had not spoken to Hamlin
      about it. Hamlin noticed no change in her, but then he never expected to see one: Anne became
      gradually more silent, more indifferent, more abrupt in her answers. Some people said, “She is
      getting spoilt by being made too much of;” and others, like Thaddy O’Reilly, hinted that the
      vagaries and splendours of æsthetic society, the poems and music and improprieties of Chough
      and Dennistoun, the nudities and Elizabethan dramatists of Lewis, were beginning to pall upon
      Miss Brown. “I’ll bet anything,” said Thaddy
       O’Reilly, “that as soon as they are married, the new Mrs
      Hamlin will abandon Mantegnesque costumes, will open a bill with Worth, and insist upon hiring
      a house in Belgravia for at least one season.” So said Thaddy O’Reilly; but it must be added
      that he said it to Mrs Spencer, to alarm and anger whose hereditary high‐art passions was the
      little journalist’s great delight. Anne still went out into æsthetic society, she still
      listened to new poems and to literary discussions, she still sat to Hamlin and to half‐a‐dozen
      other painters; but when people at concerts or the play used to point out Miss Brown as the
      queen of æstheticism, they little guessed how far removed were the thoughts of this queen from
      her realm and her subjects. Ever since that memorable conversation about Cold Fremley,
      beautiful things,—all the things—poetry, painting, music, romance—which had originally
      surrounded Hamlin with a sort of luminous emanation in Anne’s eyes,—had grown loathsome to
      her. She knew that it was unfair
       and absurd, but she could not resist the feeling that all
      the fair forms and sound patterns and imaginary passions of poetry—nay, that the very beauty
      of nature, where any existed—were foul; and her soul shrank from them as from contamination.
      She began to take a grim pleasure in that sordid ugliness which had, on her arrival in London,
      given her such a shock, and to which Hamlin and his friends were always shutting their eyes.
      The fog, the black ooze, the melancholy monotony of griminess, the hideousness of the men and
      women in the streets, jarred upon her much less than the beautiful pictures of Italian scenery
      which Hamlin hung up at Hammersmith,—than the lovely, mysterious creatures in jewel‐coloured
      robes, wandering in distant countries of bliss and romance, which Hamlin painted. The poetry
      of pure beauty sickened her; and she could not take up even the purest poems of that school,
      not even the mere charming pieces of decoration of Morris, without putting them down with
      disgust. She began to feel a vague
       nostalgic longing after her own past: faint recollections
      of her father’s grimy, workshop at Spezia, of the poor little room where her mother had sat
      doing cheap dressmaking, returned to her. The life at Florence, the sordid life with the
      Perrys, the tattered furniture and ill‐swept rooms, the dirty and noisy kitchen with the
      haunting smell of sink; the dull routine of washing and ironing and mending, of dressing and
      undressing the refractory children, of teaching them their letters and trying to keep them
      tidy; the ill‐will, the muttered anger, the jeering scraps of song of the other servants, who
      resented Anne’s superiority,—all these recollections which had almost been effaced during her
      happy new life at Coblenz and in London, returned to her, vivid as reality, and filled her
      with unaccountable yearning. And yet, when she asked herself what this meant, she could not
      but confess that she was different from what she had then been; that she had absorbed too much
      of the new life ever to be happy in the
       old one—nay, that that very indignation with the mere
      selfish worship of beauty which made all things seem black in her eyes, would never have been
      possible had she remained a mere servant. Hamlin had redeemed her soul; he had made her a
      thinking and feeling being—but what for? She dared not admit to herself that it was merely in
      order that she should despise him.
But Anne pushed aside these thoughts. She felt that she had no right to indulge in them—that
      she must give her mind to other things, her heart and her energy. Without exactly knowing what
      she could do, or even whether she could do anything at all, she felt that she must work—work
      with all her might; for it seemed as if all the thoughts which the people about her refused to
      think, all the sympathy which they refused to feel, all the work which they refused to do, and
      all the sacrifices which they refused to make, must all be taken upon herself—as if she alone
      must bear this terrible weight of rejected responsibilities. So Anne
       worked. Her cousin Dick had said that no one could do any
      good in ignorance; and she felt herself shamefully ignorant of all but useless things. She got
      together a whole heap of books and pamphlets on every possible kind of grievance and evil in
      the world; she made Marjory Leigh tell her all the dreadful things which she knew, show her
      all the dreadful things which she had seen. Of such things Marjory and her young man, the East
      End curate, could tell her but too many; yet Anne was not satisfied. She sought the
      acquaintance of Marjory’s colleagues in the work of helping the poor, and of Harry Collett’s
      fellow‐workers—older men and women, whose account of the evil of the world, less exaggerated
      and poetical than Marjory’s and Harry’s, was still more grimly tragic. They were hopeful
      nevertheless; but Anne, returning home from her attendance on lectures, her ghastly rounds in
      the slums,—home to the lovely house, with the Persian carpets, the 18th‐century hangings and
      furniture, the old majolica and Japanese
       ware, the flowers and the books of music,—returning home to
      the discussions on art and literature in Hamlin’s studio and at her own dinner‐table,—Anne
      felt mere despair. For, it must be remembered, Anne had none of those consoling thoughts to
      fall back upon which religion, however conventional, affords. Her father, a Radical workman of
      the French school, had brought her up with a few elementary ideas of right and wrong, and the
      faith that all priests, like all kings, were the curse of the world. Miss Curzon, the
      kind‐hearted old prima donna who had taken charge of her in
      her earliest girlhood, had given her examples of only the most frivolous Voltairianism; from
      the servants and the Italians who surrounded her at the Perrys, she had learned only a
      contempt for the conscienceless mummeries of the lowest Catholicism; from Mrs Perry only a
      contempt, as great in its way, for the heartless conventionalism of mere social Protestantism;
      and from Hamlin himself, and Hamlin’s friends (for at Coblenz he had stipulated
       that Miss Brown was not to be bored with
       religion), she had heard only of the religion of beauty. Of the men and women who used
      to come to Hammersmith and to Wotton, some, like Chough, professed Catholicism, and wrote
      mystical rhapsodies to the Virgin Mary; others, like Dennistoun, called the Virgin a
      prostitute, and God a highway murderer: some went in for imitating the näiveté of medieval Christianity; yet others filled their books with hymns to the
      gods, clean and foul, of paganism. There was a deal of vociferating on the subject; a deal of
      abusive language both of the religious and the irreligious; a deal of exhortation on the part
      of men like Hamlin not to have the bad taste to muddle religion with poetry; and on the whole,
      there was an atmosphere of absolute insincerity, in which, as in abstract politics (for
      certain æsthetes were extreme retrogrades, and loathed civilisation; while others would pour
      out by the hour revolutionary tirades of the most blood‐thirsty description), it appeared that
      religion
       was a mere personal hobby or poetical fiction: the usual
      conclusion being simply that the world was too disgusting a place for a well‐constituted soul;
      that the century was empty, and heartless, and emasculate; and that, as the people in the
      ‘Decameron’ fled from the plague, and told stories and sang songs in a pleasant villa all by
      themselves, so also must superior men and women fly from the sordidness, the
      uninterestingness, the mediocrity, and incapacity for passion of reality, and entertain one
      another with tales of romance and wonder in a fairy land, where the sole divinity was beauty,
      and where alone, among the lovely and noble things left by the past, noble natures could
      develop uncramped, according to the ideal of the Greeks, of medieval men, or of that most
      elevated genius, the late Théophile Gautier.
To meet the terrible realities which were now being revealed to her, to answer her own
      painful craving after usefulness, Anne had therefore only a vain negative belief—the pessimism
      which
       is at the bottom of all æstheticism, the belief in the
      fatal supremacy of evil and ugliness. But in Anne this purely negative creed speedily became
      positive; pessimism produced not a desire to abandon the odious reality and take refuge in
      mere imaginary happiness, but a frightful moral tension, a constant battle of her aspirations
      with her belief, of her conscience with her reason, a strain of rebellion against the
      inevitable. So, to the weight of the knowledge of evil, to the weight of the consciousness of
      the deadness of soul which surrounded her, was added in Anne the terrible sense of the
      injustice and callousness of nature and of fate, of the groundlessness of those instincts of
      good which left her no peace.
But all this no one ever guessed. She despised indulging her own wretchedness. She went on,
      behaving as usual, goading herself to practical concerns silently, letting no one know of her
      misery, letting no thought of it waste a moment of her time. Her longing was to break the
      hateful solidarity between
       herself and the school of æsthetic indifferentism; her
      instinct was, since she (dependent as she felt herself on a man’s charity) could not
      practically help others, at least to understand and feel about all these subjects which Hamlin
      and his friends tabooed. And with this haunting desire, she turned not merely to Marjory Lee
      and Harry Collett, but instinctively also to her cousin Dick.
“I have read the books you lent me to take into the country,” she said, giving him back the
      various primers and pamphlets on economical subjects. “Thank you so much for them, Dick.”
They were sitting alone in the drawing‐room at Hammersmith. Richard Brown had called only
      once before, ceremoniously and briefly, and he would not have come this time either, if Anne
      had not written expressly to beg him to fetch back the books. He looked at her in his
      incredulous, contemptuous way.
“Really,” he said, “my shabby old books are very much flattered by having been permitted
       to sojourn so long among such an assemblage of lovely
      things;” and he looked round the room at the pieces of embroidery and the Eastern carpets, the
      pictures and drawings, the quantities of Japanese porcelain and lacquer all round. “How much
      out of place they do look, and how queer they must have felt among their companions! Let me
      see: two volumes on artistic furniture—‘Ballads of Old France’—‘Rossetti’—‘Contes de Gautier.’
      I see—”
“Those are Mr Hamlin’s books,” said Anne, quickly; “he must have taken them out of the
      library, or brought them up from the studio. I am not reading any of them.”
“You are reading nothing but sociology and political economy; I understand,” went on Brown,
      with his placid sneer, which seemed, in this frightfully masculine man, to condemn in Anne her
      mind, her person, her manner, her character, and even her sex. “Ah, well, I can understand
      that; it must be refreshing. Who is it—Mr Pater, or some such great gun of yours—who says that
      the object of the wise
       man is to make his life consist in as many moments of
      thrilling impressions as possible; that the very wise people get them out of art and song, and
      the less wise out of vice or out of philanthropy? You must know the passage better than I.
      Well, I suppose you have got as many impressions out of art and song as possible, and (being
      far too delicate in taste to try vice) you are seeing what can be got out of philanthropy. Is
      that it?”
Anne frowned.
“Of course,” she said, “you think it very clever to snub me, Dick, and very manly; just to
      treat me as if I could not possibly have either heart or brains. Maybe; but it is a very cheap
      sort of sarcasm, and to make which a man like you is not at all required.”
Richard Brown bit his black beard, and looked at Anne from beneath his beetle brows; he
      threw himself a little back on his chair, and with his head on one side, he said, with
      affected indifference—
“You don’t mean to tell me that you
       have read those books except as you would read—what shall I
      say?—the ‘History of Furniture,’ or the ‘Contes de Gautier,’ Anne?”
“Were you ever ignorant about important vital subjects, Richard—ever conscious that it was
      your duty as a rational creature to know something about them, and then snubbed by a man who
      knew all about them, and to whom you had applied to help you?”
Brown was silent for a moment.
“I was a poor lad, working in a factory, and refusing myself food and coals in order to buy
      books and papers”—he said crushingly—“and I never had an opportunity of asking any one’s
      assistance.”
“I don’t see why there should be salvation only for people who have gone through hardships,
      nor why only you and those who have acted like you should be treated sincerely and seriously.
      Do you think that because I am a woman who has been brought up among Persian rugs and Japanese
      pots and Burne Jones’s pictures,—because I have gone to dinner‐parties
       three times a‐week, and read Pater and Rossetti and
      Gautier,—that I may not therefore be as honestly anxious to know about the serious things of
      the world as you were when you worked in a factory, and went without dinner and without
      coals?” and she fixed her eyes on her cousin’s ugly and powerful face, in which, for all its
      ugliness, one might have fancied one saw something not wholly unlike that magnificent
      sibyl‐like face which pre‐Raphaelite artists had immortalised and caricatured. “Seriously, and
      in your heart,” she went on, as Brown made no reply, “are you unable to understand that
      perhaps it may require more real determination to try and learn such things when one is
      brought up in luxury in an æsthetic house, than when one has to buy books at the price of food
      and fire?”
Richard Brown did not answer. He was a frank man, and he frankly faced Anne’s look, and in
      return looked long and searchingly at her; and as the habitual look of bantering contempt had
      given way to a serious scrutiny,
       so now he gradually grew more gentle and earnest.
“Forgive me, Anne,” he said, after a moment; “I think I may have been doing you injustice,
      and that I may, to some degree, have been disgracing myself. But, you see, I am a plain
      self‐made man, and it is difficult for me to understand how . . .”
Brown rarely hesitated for the end of his sentence, but this time he did.
“To understand how there can be any conscience or seriousness in a woman who has been
      willing to owe everything to the generosity of an æsthete like Mr Hamlin”—Anne finished his
      sentence bitterly. She went on—“Well, I know you could not believe that an æsthete could be
      generous and noble and chivalrous; and now you cannot understand how a woman who has accepted
      his generosity can be anything better than—than a piece artistic embroidery, or a Japanese
      cup, or a green tree,” and Anne pulled the long pliable leaves of a palm passionately through
      her fingers.
Brown’s suspiciousness had tried to return; but it was routed by Anne’s firm look, by Anne’s
      frank words.
“It is terrible to think how prejudiced, how inaccessible to truth, one allows one’s self to
      become,” answered Brown, “even though, Heaven knows, one tries to be fair. What you say is
      true. I couldn’t understand your not being a mere frivolous girl, Anne; and I can’t well
      understand it yet. But what you tell me I will believe.”
“Thank you, Dick,” said Anne, stretching out her hand. “I don’t think we are made to like
      each other much: you are too prejudiced, and haughty, and contemptuous; and I am too proud and
      too stiff‐necked. But we are both honest, so we might as well deal honestly and openly with
      each other, and try and understand each other’s good points.”
“I am not accustomed to deal with semi‐professional beauties, to do the Petrarch to æsthetic
       Madonna mias,” said Brown—that sneer of conscious
      masculinity and conscious
       self‐madeness coming over him again; “you must excuse my
      manner, Anne.” But he met Anne’s glance, and his tone changed once more.
“I will bring you some more books when I return,” he said. “By the way, have you ever read
      any psychology?”
“What is psychology? Is it metaphysics? I have read Hegel—” Anne stopped short, and then
      boldly added—
“ But it was only Hegel’s æsthetics, you know.”
Brown smiled. “Hegel’s æsthetics are not—well—not Posthlethwaite’s æsthetics,” he said;
      “this is not much more difficult. It is Spencer’s sociology. I will bring it you.
      Good‐bye.”
After that visit, Anne began to see more of her cousin. He came sometimes to Hammersmith,
      and he met her frequently at the Leighs. Anne did not feel that she completely liked him. He
      was pure‐minded, certainly, and generous, a man devoted to progress even in
       its humblest forms; he had a powerful intellect and a more
      powerful will. But, somehow, there was in him an indefinable coarseness of fibre, a want of
      appreciation, of sympathy with other people’s ideals, a tendency to despise all those around
      him, and to see meanness in all those who were not in the same position, or who had not the
      same views and aims as himself; above all, an unconscious desire to domineer—a brutal, almost
      animal wish for supremacy, which his knowledge of his own purity and rectitude and
      self‐sacrificing power made him accept and cherish as if it were a kind of holy spirit
      dwelling within himself, and not merely the product of a brutal temperament, which a noble
      intellect and a generous heart had severed from all brutish interests, but which remained
      brutal none the less. Anne’s pride, her consciousness of finer fibre than her cousin’s, made
      her shrink from seeking in Richard Brown for assistance in her arduous task of freeing her
      spirit from the slough of æsthetic selfishness; his suspiciousness of her motives, his
      sarcasms,
       his blindness to her purity of impulse, all this galled
      her; but she submitted to be galled. She wished her soul at least to be free, though her body
      might remain, as it were, in bondage, and Richard stood at the door of that world of nobler
      endeavour which she longed to enter; moreover, her stern spirit made her take a sort of
      pleasure in the very bitterness which she had to taste. If Richard had been sympathising, if
      he had met her half‐way and tried to help her on, she would have felt that she was bound to
      him, that she was battering her liberty once more; and vaguely Anne knew that she must never
      be bound to any one save Hamlin—that little as he could understand her, she was obliged, for
      ever, to try and understand him. And sometimes even, though the sense of Hamlin’s baseness, of
      his selfish æstheticism and his untruthful morbidness, weighed more upon her day by day, Anne
      would elaborately go over all that he had been to her—nay, all that, to the best of his power,
      he still was: she would sit for hours reading
       and re‐reading those treasured‐up letters whose arrival had
      made her so strangely happy at Coblenz; (how long, long ago it seemed, and how little that
      schoolgirl seemed to share of her identity!) and Anne, reading over those letters, carefully
      collecting together all the stances of Hamlin’s generosity and delicacy and gentleness which
      she could remember—nay, mere looks and tones which had brought home formerly her love for
      him—made up out of them a simulacrum of Hamlin, and persuaded herself that she loved it, and
      that it was Hamlin’s real reality, the reality which had become spoilt by the horrible moral
      atmosphere, distorted, warped, but a reality nevertheless. Nay, sometimes the sense of
      Hamlin’s weakness would come home to her, and with a pang make her feel how much she was bound
      to suffer, how much she was bound to do for him.
HAMLIN had forgotten all about the business of Cold Fremley, except that he had
      stopped the printing of his book, and set to work remodelling the “Ballad of the Fens,” to the
      immense admiration of Chough and Dennistoun, who were quite reconciled to realism now that it
      was allied with horrid sin. But that Anne was at all alienated from him, never once entered
      his mind. He noticed, indeed, that Anne had grown much more serious of late, that she seemed
      less happy than some months before; but for that he had his explanation. He believed that her
      character was suddenly maturing (for he never guessed that Anne’s nature was one of those
      which mature rapidly, and whose maturity means
       responsibility), and that there was brewing beneath that
      sombre exterior a storm of passion of which he was the object. That such a storm would come
      had been his persuasion from the very beginning of his acquaintance with Anne; he had guessed
      in her some strange latent force, and to see it develop had been his wish. That long
      courtship, that purely Platonic familiarity, giving scope to so much poetic devotion, poetic
      gratitude, was always to end, in Hamlin’s expectation, with a sudden burst of passion, which
      should envelop him, give his cold nature the exquisite sensation of being fired, carried off
      by a more powerful temperament than his own. Hamlin had had many love‐affairs in his day, more
      or less pure or base; he had, once or twice, been mastered by the stronger nature of a woman,
      but that had been mere brute passion, and what he desired was to rouse a passion terrifically
      overwhelming, but pure, intellectual, and with all the fearful violence of merely intellectual
      passions: a passion like
       that, which he always admired more than any other in
      literature, of Heathcliff for Catharine in ‘Wuthering Heights,’—a passion such as some men
      have felt for a dead woman. This he had always hoped from Anne, and in the expectation of this
      he had been confirmed by every new revelation of her character. Sometimes, when Anne sat
      listless in the midst of their guests, her mind for away, her tragic face more sombre for the
      blackness that was in the world around her and in her own soul, Hamlin would watch her, and
      feel, with a pang of satisfaction, that he had not been mistaken in her.
“She is not a woman, she is a mere splendid statue!” Lewis had once exclaimed angrily, as he
      felt how utterly all that kind of occult sensual fascination, which his pale mysterious face,
      his vermilion lips, his cat‐like green eyes, his low droning voice, his sultan‐like freedom of
      manner, his sense of omniscience and omnipotence, his own nature, strangely compounded of the
      beast and of
       the dreamer, indubitably exercised over many women, how
      utterly it trickled off Anne—
“She is not a woman, Hamlin,—she has an intellect and a will, but she has no soul; and one
      day you will discover it.”
“She is not a woman in the sense in which you conceive a woman,” answered Hamlin,
      contemptuously; “and she is as incapable of what you and most of us call passion, as is a
      statue. She has not one fibre of what you could call womanhood in her—not one shred of the
      beast which lies at the bottom of all our natures has entered into hers; she is a woman of
      mere stone and ice and snow for men like you. But just for that reason has she got a capacity
      for passion—for a passion which you can never understand—such as no other woman ever had. What
      are all those precious women—Cleopatras and Mary Stuarts—call them whatever you like, whom we
      think so poetical? Mere common harlots, decked out in poetical gewgaws, at bottom nothing
      better than a Madame Bovary, not so much as a Manon Lescaut
      . Mere filthy clay shaped into something comely. What is it
      to be loved by one of them? You might as well be loved by a barmaid.”
Edmund Lewis’s lip curled.
“Certainly Miss Brown suits you in your present mood, Walter; I don’t say not. But you will
      find out later what it is to be in love with a woman who is stone and ice and snow for men
      like me. Madonna Laura and Beatrice are all very fine; but your ideal lady, I repeat it, is no
      woman at all, but a mere sexless creature, something like Victor Hugo’s handsome Enjolras in
      petticoats. Passion for humanity, for fame, for abstract excellence‐oh, as much of that as you
      like; but passion for so humble a thing as a living man! Never!”
“Please leave the subject alone, Lewis,” said Hamlin. “I don’t care to have slugs creeping,
      even only in imagination, over my lilies. Talk about your women, other men’s
      women, as much as you choose, but spare me your remarks about Miss Brown.”
Chough had been listening. The excitable
       little poet of womanhood detested Lewis, whose arrogance
      grated upon him, and whose impurity of nature unconsciously offended the real innocence which
      underlay all his grandiloquently improper verses. And Chough adored Anne; she was, he often
      said, a quite new revelation of womanhood; and he believed that, as passion was the one noble
      thing in the world, and as Miss Brown was the noblest woman that had ever lived, that there
      must be a deal of passion in Anne.
“There is passion of all sorts,” said Chough, pulling his long black whiskers; “the passion
      of the pure animal, the passion of the mere human creature, and the passion of divine
      essences: the first is like a lush tropical country; the second is like the manifold sea; the
      third is like the high Alps, the highest strata of air, the purest light. The passion of
      divine essences is more terrible than any other, exactly because of its external nature: it is
      tragic. Miss Brown has that sort of passion—”
“Idiot,” muttered Hamlin ; and yet he felt pleased at Chough’s mystical corroboration of his
      ideas.
Meanwhile there was one subject upon which Anne sympathised warmly with Hamlin, and that was
      his cousin Sacha. For all her evident theatricalness, Anne warmed towards Madame Elaguine. She
      saw in her something frank and fearless which appealed to her, and a pathetic helpless desire,
      as of a child which has been naughty but wants to learn how to be good, to retrieve her own
      wasted life, to save her children from what she had undergone herself; above all, a wish to be
      in earnest without well knowing how to, a strain to be a serious woman in the midst of the
      habits of a spoilt child and of a flirt. For a spoilt child, unaccustomed to self‐control,
      impatient of small sacrifices, avid of excitement and novelty, avid of constant attention and
      admiration, Madame Elaguine certainly was; and a flirt as certainly also. She flirted with
      every one, with Hamlin, with as many of his
       friends—Chough, Lewis, and Dennistoun—as he took to her;
      with Anne, with the Leigh girls, with the solemn schoolmasters and schoolmistresses, whom she
      interviewed for the benefit of her children; she flirted—you saw it by her smile and her
      little childish laugh of recognition—with the very housemaid who opened the door; she flirted
      with every man, woman, and child, with every dog or cat that she came across.
“What a flirt that woman is, to be sure!” cried Hamlin, as he saw every one of his and
      Anne’s friends subjugated in an hour’s visit by Madame Elaguine. And to be a flirt was no
      recommendation to Hamlin; he wanted to absorb all admiration, he wanted to inspire love;
      flirts were his particular aversion.
“What harm does her flirting do?” answered Anne; “it merely makes her and those about her a
      little happier.”
“I thought you cared only for serious, for intense people, Miss Brown—you who are so serious
      and intense yourself.”
“Perhaps I am too serious”—and poor Anne felt at the moment that she certainly was too
      serious to be very happy; “but, however that may be, that is no reason why your cousin should
      not be a flirt. As long as a person can feel strongly and seriously on serious subjects, why
      quarrel with him or her for being childish about childish matters?”
For experience had taught Anne the bitter truth that people could be serious—heaven knows
      how serious!—like the odious Lewis and like Hamlin himself, and yet have no fibre of sympathy
      or indignation; and her experience of flippant little Chough, with his tenderly cared for
      wife—of flirtatious Marjory Leigh and her humanitarian labours—had made her hope most from the
      very people whose light nature she, so earnest and tragic, could understand least. And to this
      category she added Madame Elaguine.
“Your cousin has strong sides to her nature, I am quite persuaded,” she said.
Hamlin shrugged his shoulders; but nevertheless
      , though he highly resented Madame Elaguine’s all‐round
      flirtatiousness, he was forced to admit to himself that the little woman had, when you were in
      her presence, a sort of magnetic fascination.
What moved Anne was Madame Elaguine’s vehement passion for her children, the long schemes
      which, to Hamlin’s ennui, she would enthusiastically dilate
      upon for their future; and somehow, from words which she used to drop, it would seem that she
      had been in danger of losing those children—that she was still exposed to having them taken
      from her, or to being in some way separated from them. Anne did not absolutely formulate to
      herself a hope of helping Madame Elaguine; but she felt vaguely that perhaps she, with her
      seriousness and determination, might help the excitable and decidedly vague‐minded little
      woman to persist in and carry out her ideas; that here she had at last a chance of being
      useful. The first thing, Anne felt, was to bridge over the gulf of past animosity which still
      separated
       Hamlin from his cousin—to take away from Sacha Elaguine the
      demoralising sense of being an only half‐forgiven intruder. The great difficulty was Mrs
      Macgregor. The old lady could not abate one tittle of her hatred for the Sacha of former
      days.
“I tell you she is a bad woman, and you will find it out some day to your cost,” she would
      answer Anne. “The woman is contained in the child: or rather the woman is only the child
      altered and trimmed up to pass muster—dressirt, as my friend
      Schopenhauer says.”
“But, Auntie Claudia,” persisted Anne, “if a person can alter sufficiently to pass muster,
      why should that person not alter also in obedience to her awakened reason and conscience? Why
      should one not be able to shed the bad qualities of one’s childhood, for quite new and good
      ones?”
“Because one cannot, Anne; because the fox remains a fox, and the cat remains a cat, and the
      swine remains a swine.” And Mrs Macgregor looked with cynical compassion at Anne.
“I might have remained a mere soulless servant, had every one gone on your theory,” answered
      Anne. “No, I cannot agree with you, Aunt Claudia. I think it is terrible to condemn a woman
      because she was a good‐for‐nothing child; I think it is terrible to shut her out from sympathy
      which might be a comfort and an encouragement to her if she be still in need of any.”
“Ah, well, that is how you young people of to‐day always talk. You would object to sending
      criminals to the docks, because it is shutting them out of improving society.”
“I don’t see that the cases are parallel. I merely ask that a person be not condemned where
      she could not be responsible. If I thought that any one were really and hopelessly vicious, a
      mere source of evil, I think I should do my best to crush them out, to trample upon them.”
“That is how you are, Anne, willing to be a moral sick‐nurse or a moral executioner. In a
      world where every one has some horrid
       moral disease or is some horrid moral nuisance, you will
      soon find that such a line as that leaves no time to live. However, as to Sacha
      Polozoff—Madame Elaguine, I suppose I ought to call her—do whatever you please. You are your
      own mistress, and free to choose your own friends. See as much of the woman as you please, as
      long as you don’t expect me to sympathise with you in your admiration, love, and awe of
      her.”
“I don’t feel any admiration or love or awe for Madame Elaguine. But I think that she is a
      comparatively young woman, very impulsive and rather injudicious, all alone here in London;
      and I think she ought not to be shut out from the only house which she has, as Mr Hamlin’s
      cousin, a sort of right to enter.”
“As you choose, Anne. Invite her, give up the house to her; do what you please. But
      remember, when you have burnt your fingers, that I told you you were playing with fire.”
So Anne had her way. And Madame Elaguine came often to Hammersmith. Hamlin and Anne did
      their best to prevent her meeting Mrs Macgregor; Madame Elaguine was received mainly in the
      studio, where, little by little, and at first seemingly casually, Hamlin’s friends would drop
      in to meet her. She was a curiously fascinating little woman. Education, in any regular sense,
      she seemed never to have had; she was grotesquely ignorant about a great many things, and
      laughed at it herself.
“I am teaching myself arithmetic in order to teach my boy a little before he goes to
      school,” she would say—or spelling, or grammar, or something similar. On the other hand, she
      had a lot of superficial accomplishments, like most Russians: she spoke four or five languages
      with tolerable correctness and extraordinary fluency; she had, in some mysterious manner,
      acquired Greek. She read little, and that little mainly novels and poetry; but, with her
      Russian rapidity to adapt herself to a new position,
       she had scarcely realised that she had been accidentally
      drafted into æsthetical society, before she had got æsthetic literature, æsthetic gossip, and
      æsthetic modes of feeling at her finger‐ends. She immediately understood the relative
      positions of Hamlin, of Chough, of Dennistoun, of Lewis, and of all the others; and was able
      to talk to each as he best liked to be talked to. She began with a passion for Alfred de
      Musset, for Gautier, for Catulle Mendès, and she rapidly became an enthusiast for Swinburne,
      for Rossetti, for Chough, and, above all, “for that genius, Monsieur
       mon cousin.” She let herself be talked to about æsthetic dresses, gravely listening
      (with only a little side‐look of amusement at Hamlin or Anne) to Mrs Spencer’s strictures on
      modern costumes, on stays, and heels, and tight waists and full skirts; and she immediately
      set to work untrimming her frocks and making them up into wondrous garments, not at all like
      what any æsthetic woman had ever worn in her life, but queer, fantastic, delightful, neither
       Greek nor medieval, but individual and quaint and
      fascinating.
“Dressmaking, as long as only pins are required, is my one talent, my one accomplishment,”
      she would say, when any one admired the capricious garments, in which she looked sometimes
      like a schoolgirl, and sometimes like a page in woman’s clothes, and sometimes almost like a
      little nun. But this was not the case. Without ever having learned, she sang with wonderful
      charm: a small, childish, high voice, which trilled out Russian and Spanish and French
      folk‐songs, and which had a strange, hot, passionate power of singing those German songs which
      poor Anne, for all her fine voice (which Chough used distressingly to compare with that of
      various equivocal singers of former days) and her conscientious learning, could never succeed
      in rendering. But the fact was that Madame Elaguine’s personality was surrounded by a vague
      halo and shimmer of talents: she had never learned to do anything, yet she could somehow do
      everything; she
       could write fearfully misspelt but fascinating letters and
      bits of verse and prose; she could mimic and act.
“She is a first‐rate actress,” was one of the first things which Edmund Lewis, who seemed at
      once singularly attracted and puzzled by her, found to say about Madame Elaguine.
“You think that because she sometimes looks a little like Sarah Bernhardt,” answered Hamlin,
      who never cared much to hear his cousin praised, since everything which was praised in her
      seemed to point to a deficiency in Anne.
“I think she is an actress because I see it,” answered Lewis, in his positive way. “For my
      part, I don’t think any of you half appreciate all that there is in Madame Elaguine.”
“A nice little kittenish, intelligent flirt; just the same as a hundred Russian women one
      has known,” said Hamlin.
Lewis shook his head.
“That woman is not a mere ordinary flirt. She has an almost unique temperament: she is a
      first‐rate medium; I feel it.”
“You have felt so many people to be first‐rate mediums, Mr Lewis,” said Anne, scornfully.
      “Do you remember, you thought once that I was one.”
“So I did. But this time I’m not mistaken;” and he gave Anne one of those looks of fierce
      aversion which, loathing him as she did, she rather liked from the little painter.
However, Lewis proved right this time. Madame Elaguine had scarcely ever heard about
      spiritualism, but she threw herself into it with all her Russian ardour, and in a very short
      time, under Lewis’s guidance, became a great adept. Lewis declared that he had never met so
      gifted a medium in his life; and, indeed, Madame Elaguine showed a perfectly marvellous power
      of going off into trances, reading thoughts, and otherwise communicating with spirit‐land.
A young doctor, one of Marjory Leigh’s hygienic demigods, whom she brought to call on Anne,
      once met Madame Elaguine at Hammersmith. Anne noticed the way in which he
       watched her face and manner; she seemed somehow to interest
      him as a problem.
“Why were you staring so at Mr Hamlin’s cousin?” asked Marjory Leigh when the Russian had
      left.
“Staring at her?” answered the Professor, vaguely.
“She is a very pretty woman, and very charming,” said Anne; “I think that is sufficient
      explanation.”
“Well,” said the young doctor, a rough, brusque creature, “that wasn’t exactly the reason. I
      was thinking how very—well, to put it plainly—how very hysterical a subject that lady
      looks.”
“What do you mean by hysterical?” said Anne, quickly. “She is very nervous, but she doesn’t
      seem to me to be at all subject to any kind of fits.”
“That’s not what we mean by hysteria,” exclaimed the doctor. “Hysteria isn’t a
      fit of hysterics; it is a condition of morbid nervous excitability, usually accompanied by a
      certain
       loss of will‐power. Hysterical subjects are a kind of
      milder mad men and women; their characters undergo curious modifications; they haven’t the
      same responsibilities as others. I wonder whether that lady is not a spiritualist,—she looks
      like it.”
“She has let Mr Lewis, who has gone in a good deal for that sort of thing, mesmerise her
      once or twice,” answered Anne. “I don’t believe in that rubbish myself.”
“Nor do I. But there is this much of truth in it, that some sorts of temperaments are
      naturally inclined to it, and that it reacts upon them. And I should think it would be the
      case with that lady.”
“But surely,” hesitated Anne, “people who are in good health—who have never had any kind of
      nervous illness or shock—don’t get into that state.”
“Oh yes, they do. It is often hereditary; one or two, or even sometimes only one, depraved
      ancestor will do it for you.”
The recollection of all she had heard of
       Sacha’s horrible profligate old Russian father, of her
      violent and weak and constantly ailing mother, flashed across Anne. And then came also the
      remembrance of those portraits at Wotton Hall—of those generations of weak and depraved
      planters, who had been the grandfathers and granduncles of Sacha as well as of Hamlin.
And any remaining ill‐will which Mrs Macgregor’s stories had left was swept away. Anne did
      not like Madame Elaguine, in the same way that she liked the Leighs or even Mrs Spencer; but
      she felt a sudden strong compassion for her. Perhaps, she thought, there is more goodness in
      the world than I guessed. And it seemed to her that this giddy little woman, with her
      passionate desire for the welfare of her children, this woman who had struggled through the
      disadvantages of hereditary weakness and corrupt training, was a sort of a hero.
AUTUMN turned to winter, and at last Hamlin’s long‐expected, much‐talked‐of book of
      new poems made its appearance. In her gradual estrangement from Hamlin, in the gradual
      replacing of the ideal creature whom she had so fervently loved by a reality by which she was
      beginning to be repelled, Anne had hung some of her last hopes to Hamlin’s poetry. She would
      often say to herself that, after all, Hamlin made no pretence to being anything more than an
      artistic nature; that he was a great artist, born to give the world a certain amount of
      pleasure, and that she had no right to ask of him to be anything else. What could she, willing
      as she was to sympathise and to work,—what could a
       man like Richard Brown, with all his self‐sacrificing
      energy and ability, do for mankind that might compare with what had been done by Leonardo, by
      Mozart, by Keats—men as solely artistic as Hamlin? and Hamlin was a great poet,
      and would become a greater one—of that Anne felt persuaded, for his work was steadily
      improving, and there were things in this book which she recognised as having the highest
      merit. So she clung to Hamlin’s poetry as to an anchor for his nobility and for her affection.
      At length the volume was published. Hamlin arrived at Hammersmith one morning and placed a
      copy of it by the side of Anne’s plate at breakfast.
“It is the first copy,” he said, “and as such, belongs to you.”
“Thank you,” said Anne, flushing with pleasure; for, opening the book, she found on the
      fly‐leaf a little poem, imitated from the love‐songs of the Tuscan peasants, in which Hamlin
      dedicated the volume to her; it was beautiful and simple and almost solemn—the
       very flower of that distant and poetic love which he
      professed towards her.
“You have put in the ‘Ballad of the Fens’ after all! Oh, thank you so much, Mr Hamlin! You
      know I always thought it the best thing you have ever done,” she exclaimed.
Hamlin did not answer; perhaps because he was aware that this “Ballad of the Fens,”
      rewritten under the influence of Dennistoun, was not the same as the one which he had torn up
      three months before. Anne soon discovered it: reading through the still uncut sheets, she
      found that instead of the story of married love, which had called down the wrath of the whole
      school, Hamlin had set in his beautiful descriptions a ghastly tale which she scarcely
      required more than to glance at. So this was all that had come of her having mentioned Cold
      Fremley to him!
“I think I have made the story more tragic and more in harmony with the surrounding nature.
      I always felt that I needed some more powerful and terrible situation. Like this,
       I think the effect is sufficiently worked out, don’t you
      think?”
“Yes,” said Anne, icily. There was the description of the sunset on the fens, of the broad
      slow river flowing between low green banks, its clotted masses reflecting the red sunset
      embers; the description of the whole scene as they had witnessed it; and then a description of
      the people of Cold Fremley, of their lives and sins, in which she could almost recognise her
      own words in which she had vainly pleaded for them that memorable afternoon in his studio. A
      cold terror prevented Anne from turning at once to the sonnets. But after all, had he not, as
      it were, promised to abide by her choice? had he not submitted, however reluctantly, to the
      condemnation of those twelve sonnets? Anne felt ashamed of her own suspicions and fears; she
      boldly turned to the end of the book, peeped between the leaves—
“Desire—XII. Sonnets.”
Anne did not know what was the feeling
       which filled her. She had never felt it before. It was too
      cold to be indignation, too self‐possessed to be horror: she seemed surrounded by an icy
      atmosphere, through which she saw Hamlin as through a mist. He had broken his word, and for
      what? To attribute to himself vicious thoughts and feelings which he had never had. Anne said
      not a word; the man who was capable of acting thus could not understand if he were chidden for
      it.
Breakfast passed gloomily, talking little, or of indifferent things. Hamlin was evidently
      ruffled by this reception of his book.
“Are you going to sit to me this morning, Miss Brown?” he asked with some irritation, as he
      rose from table.
“I will, if you wish me to.”
Anne’s voice smote him as if he had opened the window to a snowstorm.
“Have you anything else to do?”
“I always have plenty to do, you know. If you don’t want me, I shall go out with Marjory
      Leigh.”
“So much the better. I don’t feel as if I could work successfully this morning, and I should
      be sorry to detain you for nothing at all. I will go and ask my cousin whether she would care
      to see Lewis’s studio. This weather is very depressing.”
“Very,” answered Anne.
Anne went out with Marjory Leigh, who was on a round of visiting poor people at Lainbeth.
      They were joined by Harry Collett. He stood in great awe of his future bride’s superior wisdom
      and dogmatic manner; but it was touching to see how completely these two creatures—the shy and
      mystical curate, and the masterful and rationalistic young woman, who was wont to tell him
      that some day he should be persuaded that only secular work was really useful, and the Church
      ought to be disestablished—understood each other, and sympathised in their best
      endeavours.
“Hamlin has brought out a new book,” said Collett to Anne. “How proud you must be, Miss
      Brown! he has been quite another man,
       twice as cheerful and devoted to his art, since he has
      known you. For a poet like him, so sensitive and easily depressed, it must be a great thing to
      have a noble woman to encourage him.”
Anne did not answer. She felt alone—alone as in a desert, without an ear to hear her, or a
      hand to touch hers.
Often did that sensation recur to her now; a sensation as of dragging wearily and alone
      along an ice‐bound road, under a grey wintry sky, weary and solitary, but with the knowledge
      that the more solitary and weary she felt, the more was she bound to plod on. Things that
      happened seemed spectral. Here in London she saw less of Hamlin than in the country; he was
      going about with his friends, he was at his cousin’s. She did not know or care where. People
      talked a great deal about the new book; and only Anne was silent.
“You don’t like Hamlin’s new book,” said Richard Brown to her one evening, fixing his eyes
      upon her in his ruthless way. He came often now; he had apparently got to believe in
       her, and he even held out a possibility to her, if she
      continued to work steadily, reading and attending lectures, that she might by the summer‐time
      be able to offer herself to teach the elements of political economy at the Working Women’s
      Club.
“You don’t like Hamlin’s new book.”
It was not a question, but an assertion, and Anne felt it as a taunt.
“I like some things in it extremely,” she answered boldly; “but I dislike and disapprove of
      some others.”
Brown made a characteristic upward movement with one of his big black eyebrows.
“I thought that you æsthetic folk never disapproved of anything—that it was against the
      canons of art to disapprove.”
“I am not an æsthete, Richard. If I were, I should not be trying to learn the things in
      which you take interest.”
“True. And does Hamlin know that you dislike and disapprove of some of his poems?”
For a moment Anne did not answer.
       Brown’s question was like an insolent attempt to see into
      her heart. Yet what right had she to hide anything?
“He knows exactly what I think about all his poems; but he does not, naturally, agree with
      me in all my views.”
She was determined to keep her cousin at a distance. He had hated her ever becoming
      connected with æsthetic society, and he tried to force her to admit that she regretted it.
But Brown had an inveterate hatred which he could not put aside.
“Have you seen the review in the ‘Saturday Gazette’?” he asked.
The review was one of the few bad ones which Hamlin’s book had had, among a chorus of good
      ones. But it was written by a rabid enemy of pre‐Raphaelite poetry; and who had taken the
      occasion of this book to show up what he considered the pestilent moral condition of the whole
      school.
“Yes; I have. It is a very unjust and violent attack, and quite indiscriminating.”
“So I thought. Still, what it quoted from the sonnets called Desire seemed,
      so far, to bear out its statements. What do you think?”
“I think,” answered Anne slowly, and choking her pride and emotion, “that all he says about
      those sonnets is quite correct. I think it is most regrettable that they should have been
      published. But I think that in writing them Mr Hamlin was merely following the vicious
      traditions of his school; and I know that he is, in reality, a perfectly pure‐minded man.
      And,” she added, as if to put an end to the conversation, “he is the man to whom I owe more
      gratitude than any woman ever owed to any man.”
Brown did not press the conversation. He understood. He had of late been getting to
      comprehend Anne’s character; he recognised her serious unselfishness, her indomitable desire
      for good; he saw in her a strange straining dissatisfaction—a something which was as the
      beating of a bird’s wings against its cage. And now he understood whence it came.
“She has made her choice and must abide by it,” he said sternly to himself, remembering that
      scene when he had tried vainly to dissuade her from accepting Hamlin’s offer, and she had
      answered, “I love him!” “She has sold her soul into bondage, and must accept the isolation and
      silence and uselessness of a slave.” But then, as he said good night and looked at that noble
      face, whose tragic intensity of rectitude was now revealed to him, Richard Brown could not
      help feeling a pang. “Poor child!” he said to himself; and wished he had proved less of a
      prophet than he believed himself to have done.
He began, in consequence, to feel a little ashamed of himself, and came oftener to see Anne.
      He was a brilliant man when you got him on his own subjects, warm‐hearted, self‐sacrificing,
      ambitious, eloquent; and he had always a number of practical schemes at heart. Originally a
      hand at a foundry, he had for some time, like Anne’s father, been smitten with communistic
      theories; but instead of
       being tempted into becoming a socialistic demagogue, he
      had, when he was about twenty‐five, given up the little workman’s newspaper, of which he was
      editor and chief author, and deliberately set to work studying economical and social questions
      in the intervals of his work, carefully suspending his judgment during the while. To a man as
      impetuous and ambitious as Brown, to whom the easy and tempting path of party leader lay open,
      such a course must have meant a terrible and long‐sustained effort of self‐control. But his
      indomitable conscience and will had carried him through it; and now he was reaping the
      unexpected reward of his forbearance. While slowly working his way in business and studying
      the subjects which were dearest to him, he had managed also to cultivate a mechanical genius,
      which seemed in some way hereditary in the family of Anne’s father, who, in happier
      circumstances, might perhaps have been a brilliant inventor instead of a starving expatriated
      workman. He had made valuable improvements
       in the foundry of which he had become the foreman, and had
      now, for the last two years, been the chief partner and virtual director of the business, with
      a fair livelihood in the present, and a large fortune and great influence in the immediate
      future. But money and influence were nothing to Richard Brown; or rather, influence to him
      meant merely the triumph of his own philanthropical schemes. Selfish he undoubtedly was, but
      his selfishness, his vanity, his pride, his ambition, were drafted off into the service of
      others. Anne listened with enthusiasm, but not unmixed with sadness, to her cousin’s projects
      for educating the lower classes, for bringing home to the upper classes their own
      responsibilities; they had the charm of dreams, but of the dreams of a man who seemed able to
      make what he desired into reality. Even in this æsthetic society, which had looked upon him
      with suspicion and loathing, Richard Brown got a certain importance. He would spend hours with
      old Saunders the painter, and
       his daughter, the enthusiastic Mrs Spencer, discussing the
      way of introducing more beautiful patterns into trade, and of getting up schools of design and
      loan exhibitions for the poorer classes.
“He is a man of the middle ages!” Mrs Spencer would enthusiastically exclaim; “if only we
      had a few more like him, we should soon build cathedrals and town‐halls like
      those of the fourteenth century.”
“He is a canny Radical,” answered her father, “but a gude sort of man. For my part, I don’t
      much believe in educating the lower classes up to art, but there’s no harm in trying, and, at
      least, we shall get better‐made chairs and tables for our money.”
Chough was equally enthusiastic. Richard Brown was anxious to get up some concerts at a kind
      of workman’s union at which he presided; and Chough—yes, the great Chough himself, who hinted
      mysteriously that his father (who was an apothecary at Limerick) was a duke, but that he would
      rather die
       than succeed to the title—was prevailed upon to take the
      musical direction upon himself. While these schemes were going on, Madame Elaguine met Richard
      Brown.
There was something in this big, burly, rather brutal man, which immediately fascinated the
      nervous little Russian woman: she sat at Brown’s feet, she listened with rapture to his
      theories, she threw herself headlong into the plan of the concerts; she offered to perform, to
      teach, to do whatever Brown might wish.
Hamlin was thoroughly disgusted with his cousin Sacha, who had hitherto known no divinity
      save him and pure beauty, when he saw her devoting herself to humanitarianism, personified in
      what he called “that shoddy philanthropical black brute.” He became vehemently devoted to
      Anne. He seemed to repent of his book. He declared himself sick of London and of æsthetic
      society.
“I must turn over a new leaf,” he said. “I feel I must, or sink into being no better than
      Chough or Dennistoun. But I am too weak
       to turn it over alone. Will you help me, Miss Brown?”—and
      he looked at her with his slow, beautiful glance of Platonic love.
Anne smiled sadly. “No one can help any one, I am beginning to fear; and I least of all.”
      She had got so accustomed to these sudden returns of Hamlin’s, to these false starts, these
      longings after a healthier moral and intellectual atmosphere, which came to nothing. She saw
      so plainly the hopeless weakness and thinness of his nature; and yet in such moments she could
      not help feeling some of that old love for this beautiful, delicate, idealistic, chivalrous
      creature whom she knew to be mere selfishness and vanity. If only he would remain thus at
      least.
“Perhaps you are right,” answered Hamlin, leaning over the piano at which she was seated;
      “but I feel myself sick of this life, this poetry. All is false, false, hollow, and empty. My
      verses are untrue, my pictures are mere Christmas cards; even with you as a model, I feel I am
      always repeating the same
       wearisome insipid trick of eyes, and mouth, and neck. Oh, I
      don’t know what to do!”
It was but too true. That school of mere beautiful suggestion, which scorned reality and
      mechanical skill as a bird scorns the ground, was fast sinking into nullity. Anne had often
      remarked it in comparing the works of various masters; she had noticed the stray sentences,
      not meant for her, dropped by painters of other schools.
“Go to Paris and study for a year or so under Bastien‐Lepage, or Henner, or Duran,” she
      said, with a smile at the vanity of her own words.
Hamlin could not even conceive that she was in earnest, that any one could dream of seeing
      anything in modern French painting, that any one could be so mad as to think of
       his studying.
“Yes,” he cried, “that is the only art that can live in our day! Ours is a mere phantom; our
      poetry is a phantom; they come round us imploring us to give them life, like
       the ghosts round Odysseus’s trench. But who shall give them
      life? Where shall we get the life‐blood of passion whereon to feed and revivify them?”
And he suddenly turned round and looked at her with great yearning eyes. Hamlin was
      genuinely unhappy, though he did not guess that his unhappiness was due to vacuity, to
      slighted vanity, to the sudden infatuation of Madame Elaguine for a shoddy philanthropist. He
      longed for passion as, in hot climates, after months of faint sultriness, one longs for rain
      and wind; and he looked at Anne as one might watch the dark clouds hanging on the hills, the
      dark clouds which hold the storm for which one is thirsting. Oh for a strong passion!—it would
      revive him, revive his art. Hamlin did not say it to himself in so many words, but he felt
      it.
He talked long and vehemently about the necessity of going outside one’s self, of
      transmuting one’s consciousness into that of another, of having something beyond one’s self to
       live for. He told Anne, always with those yearning eyes
      fixed upon her, that what was wanted to revive the world and art (and by the world he meant
      himself) was passion; but not the mere sultry passion which his school had sung about, which
      merely enervated and sent to sleep, but the clear cold air, the whirlwinds and thunderstorms
      of ideal love—of love such as Dante had felt for Beatrice, and Heathcliff for Cathey. It was
      very eloquent and beautiful what he said about this love, which was something vague and quite
      unselfish and outside one’s self,—a sort of act of adoration and purification and
      renunciation,—a meeting of two souls which vibrated in unison in their desire for the good and
      the noble. While he spoke, Anne almost believed that he was sincere; sincere, indeed, he was,
      but according to his nature, not hers. She felt the tears coming into her eyes, and a vague
      wish to throw herself into his arms and implore him to cast aside his selfish habits, to live
      for the life of other men and
       for her love, came to her heart. But when, suddenly, their
      conversation was interrupted by the entry of Edmund Lewis and Madame Elaguine, it all ebbed
      back, till her whole nature seemed to burst. She felt that he did not know what he was saying,
      what he did not comprehend what he was wanting; she felt the uselessness of saying to this man
      that the world and herself were waiting for him to love them, that her whole nature was
      sickening for want of one with which to vibrate in harmony of desire for the good and the
      noble. Cold Fremley, the sonnets, a hundred little words and looks which had made the chasm
      between them, returned to her. She felt once more alone, terribly and hopelessly alone.
And still, when she met her cousin Dick, and realised how different he was, how genuine and
      strong and passionate for good, she could not help experiencing a sort of repulsion from him,
      and a melancholy, hopeless throwing of herself back on to the unreal Hamlin.
       She felt that Richard Brown, with all his nobility and
      energy of nature, would never have done for her what Hamlin had done, would never have been
      for her what Hamlin had been; that he would never have singled her out, her a mere servant,
      and guessed that in her there was a soul which could love and could aspire. But after all, why
      had Hamlin singled her out? and what had he guessed in her, what had he hoped from her? That
      line of Rossetti’s, which Hamlin admired more than any other, which he so often quoted— “Beauty like hers is genius,”— returned to her with a chill; and she felt that Hamlin wanted, expected from her that
      sort of passion which he had spoken of to revive him and his art. It seemed to her as if she
      had been sold in the slave‐market, and were being told “now love.”
RICHARD BROWN did not let Madame Elaguine sit at his feet very long. After about a
      fortnight of extremely assiduous visits at the Russian lady’s house at Kensington, during
      which he poured out to the enthusiastic little woman all his philanthropical schemes, Richard
      suddenly gave up calling, and even avoided meeting Madame Elaguine at other houses.
“Why have you deserted Madame Elaguine so suddenly?” asked Anne of her cousin. To confess
      the truth, Anne was rather malicious in her question. She had speedily recognised the vanity,
      or rather the self‐sufficiency, the belief in his own irresistible uniqueness, which was the
      leaven of Cousin Dick’s virtues, and she had been amused from the first at seeing
       how this earnest philanthropist had let himself be caught
      by Madame Elaguine’s conscious or unconscious instinct of flirtation; and now, she thought,
      Dick has suddenly awaked from his dream of having fascinated and converted her. Anne smiled as
      she asked the question, but there was sadness as well as amusement in her smile. In his
      way—his blind, self‐satisfied, unselfish way—Dick was as vain as Hamlin: wherever she looked
      vanity and hollowness met her, and she herself could not even conceive what vanity was.
“Why have you deserted Madame Elaguine?” repeated Anne.
Brown suddenly raised his big, rough, black head from the review which he had been
      mechanically looking at, and answered, looking straight in front of him—
“Don’t speak to me about Madame Elaguine; she is an odious woman.”
There was something brief and silencing in his tone which surprised Anne and precluded
      further questions.
“In fact,” added Richard Brown, “if it were not that a woman like you will never even
      understand what Madame Elaguine is made of, I should peremptorily say that she is not a person
      for you to know.”
Anne was indignant, and yet, at the same time, a little shocked.
“Why, what has Madame Elaguine done?”
“Done!” answered Brown, half waiving the subject, and half insisting upon it, as
      self‐important men frequently do. “Why, she has done nothing. But that makes no
      difference; she’s an odious woman.”
Anne laughed bitterly. The whole world seemed so awry, every one seeing everything through
      the crooked spectacles of his own vanity. Now here was Dick insinuating evil against a woman
      because he had been such a big baby as to fancy her in love with him.
“Men are very unjust!” cried Anne; “they always trump up some mysterious sin to justify
      their unreasonable aversions.”
Brown reddened, and was on the point of
       saying something. But he checked himself, and merely
      remarked—
“Oh, of course women always fancy that they understand each other better than a man
      can.”
“So they can! A woman can always understand another woman better than a man can, who
      attributes all sorts of nasty masculine faults to women, or suspects imaginary feminine ones,
      when he doesn’t see clear. Oh yes, I know: every woman is weak, vain, a creature of impulse
      and passion, something half‐way only between the man and the child, as I read in a French
      paper, with a kind of sham character, like the backbones of cartilage or jelly of some lower
      creatures!”
Brown shook his head.
“Most women are like that, but not all; not you, Anne, for instance.”
“Thank you,” answered Anne, scornfully.
“But all women, at least all noble women, are unable to judge of other women. How should
      they judge? It is only a man, or a
       base woman, who knows of the mud out of which many women,
      like many men, are moulded.”
“One does not need to be base to know that,” said Anne, half to herself; and she thought of
      the mud which she had discovered in her own silver idol.
“I don’t think we are alluding to the same thing,” said Cousin Dick, turning off the
      conversation.
“Mere vanity, and the injustice of vanity,” said Anne to herself, and her pessimism became
      more confirmed. But later, although she continued to believe quite equally in Richard Brown’s
      vanity, she began to suspect that there had been in this coarse‐looking man a movement of
      modesty, an unwillingness to let her eyes rest upon some nasty thing which he had seen. But of
      this, at present, she had no idea, and Madame Elaguine, although she did not find much in
      common with her, became for Anne another victim of the vanity and injustice of the world.
They saw a good deal of the little woman now. Anne thought she understood her thoroughly,
      and owned to herself that she had not understood her at first. She recognised that the little
      woman had much more character than she had at first imagined; and the impression of frailness,
      childishness, and helplessness which something in Madame Elaguine’s appearance, manner, and
      voice had at first given her, wore away so completely that she could scarcely believe it had
      ever existed. Eccentric and irresponsible she still seemed, always rushing from one enthusiasm
      to another, always thirsting for excitement; but Anne found that instead of a childish girl
      who could lean upon her, she had to deal with a woman, undisciplined and capricious indeed,
      but still, in many respects, more of a woman than herself. She was flighty and giddy like her
      own little girl in many respects, and fully as ignorant of many things; but she had a
      knowledge of sides of life which Anne instinctively guessed, and from which she recoiled
      . With an extraordinary love of the beautiful, the
      fantastic, and the ideal, which, as it made her dress herself in queer ingénue little costumes, also made her mould her conduct, ideas, and words rather
      theatrically in obedience to a conception of something striking and pretty,—Madame Elaguine
      had, at the same time, a vein—no, Anne thought it must be a mere exterior dab, not due to her
      inner nature, but to her Russian and Continental education—of coarseness, which surprised and
      pained Miss Brown. Once or twice, in Anne’s presence, she alluded to things in a manner which
      gave Anne a shock; and Anne, who, half Italian as she was, and wholly fearless and unprudish,
      would ask herself what right she had had to feel like that; she would analyse Madame
      Elaguine’s words, and find them, when measured by a Continental standard, very harmless; yet
      somehow, though she told herself that she was stupid and unjust, something of the painful
      impression would remain. Also, she could not conceive
       how a woman could like to sit for hours, as Madame Elaguine
      did, on the score of spiritual séances, with a man like
      Edmund Lewis. She never heard him talk on anything objectionable to the Russian; and yet there
      was something to her inconceivable in the endurance of this man by a young woman. Anne came to
      the conclusion that she must be growing horribly prejudiced and unjust; and the less she could
      sympathise with some of Madame Elaguine’s tastes (though there was nothing really
      objectionable in them) the more did she force herself to try and understand, and make
      allowance for, and help the little woman. And one day Anne’s sympathies were really enlisted
      for her.
It was about Christmas, and Anne had prevailed upon Hamlin to accompany her and Madame
      Elaguine to a pantomime, to which the Russian was taking her little girl, and Anne the two
      Chough children. Anne amused herself heartily, as she always did, at every sort of theatrical
      performance, with the love
       of shows and acting in her Italian blood; she was so happy
      laughing with the children, while Hamlin talked with his cousin and Chough in the back of the
      box, that that evening long remained a sort of oasis in the dreariness of her inner life.
      There was a tremendous crush in the lobbies and on the stairs;. and while Chough shoved on his
      two children, and Hamlin tried to make way through the crowd for his frail little cousin, who
      looked as if she would be knocked over and trampled like a feather, Anne, towering through the
      throng (and people turned to look at that magnificent pale face, set in crisp black hair, and
      said to each other, “Look there; that’s Miss Brown, the famous pre‐Raphaelite beauty”), held
      Sacha Elaguine’s little girl close in front of her, calmly making the crowd divide as a ship
      divides the water. They were fairly out of the theatre, on the steps looking out into the
      street, with the gas burning dim in the fog, and the long splashes of yellow light on pavement
      and wet cab‐tops,
       waiting in the damp cold, while Chough called their
      carriage, and Madame Elaguine, leaning on Hamlin’s arm, the two little Choughs by her side,
      had heaved a sigh of relief, and exclaimed—
“Oh, how delicious it is to be in the cold, and fog, and dark, after that theatre!—”
When little Hélène Elaguine, who was holding Anne’s hand, and see‐sawing from one leg to
      another—while staring at the men in opera hats and comforters, and the ladies and children
      huddled in furs, and the policemen and cabmen who passed in front—suddenly gave a piercing
      shriek, and threw herself into Anne’s arms, clinging to her and burying her head in her
      pelisse.
“Good heavens! what’s the matter, child?” cried Anne, mechanically clasping the little girl
      round the waist.
“What’s the matter?” cried Hamlin, who had not seen this action.
But Madame Elaguine had let go his arm and darted forward, white as ashes, and seized
       her child from Anne, and cried—“Let us go! let us go!” in
      an agonised voice.
The carriage came up, and she jumped into it, scarcely giving Hamlin and Anne time to
      follow, and leaving Chough and his children amazed before the theatre door.
The carriage stopped at her door in Kensington.
“I cannot pass this night alone with only Helen and the servants! I cannot, I cannot!”
And Madame Elaguine burst into tears, strangely intermingled with hysterical laughs.
“They want to take my child away; they are trying it again!”
“What is to be done?” asked Hamlin.
“I will stay to‐night with Madame Elaguine,” said Anne, with decision; “if you will go to
      Hammersmith and tell Aunt Claudia’s maid that your cousin was feeling ill, and I am staying
      with her till to‐morrow. Help Madame Elaguine out, will you?”
Hamlin lifted his cousin out of the carriage, while Anne took charge of the child,
       whom its nurse carried up in a condition of lethargic
      sleep.
When they were in Madame Elaguine’s drawing‐room, the Russian took the child in her arms,
      and flinging herself on a sofa, burst out crying, her sobs interrupted by moaning complaints
      that some one wanted to take her child away.
“I will go to Hammersmith now, and leave you with her,” whispered Hamlin to Anne, who had
      knelt down by the side of the sofa.
“I will come to‐morrow morning for news; good night.”
“Good night,” answered Anne, under her breath.
But Madame Elaguine heard. She started up, and looking wildly about—
“Oh, don’t leave me alone yet!” she cried.
“Miss Brown will remain, Sacha,” said Hamlin.
“Oh, don’t leave me yet, Walter!” repeated
       Madame Elaguine. “I am afraid—I am afraid of Miss
      Brown.”
“I think you had better remain, Mr Hamlin,” whispered Anne; “she will probably be quiet in a
      minute or two.”
Hamlin took a chair near the table, and looked on in surprise. Madame Elaguine was stretched
      on the sofa, her sleeping child pressed close to her; her little head, with its short pale
      curls, thrown back; her eyes half closed, moaning and gasping and sobbing; and Anne, kneeling
      by her side, looking anxiously into that curious, convulsed face.
“Do you think she is going to faint?” asked Hamlin of his cousin’s Swiss maid, who stood by,
      the picture of self‐satisfied composure.
“Oh no—Monsieur need be under no apprehension. Madame often had de
       ces crises; Madame was often frightened like that. It was the first time since
      Madame was in England, but it was quite common. Madame,” added the servant quietly, “has
      probably seen her black man—”
“What black man?” asked Hamlin.
Sacha Elaguine had suddenly raised herself on her elbow,—as if she had heard the maid’s
      words.
“Take Mademoiselle Hélène to bed, Sophie,” she said quietly.
“Shan’t I take her?” asked Anne.
“Sophie knows how to manage her,” answered Madame Elaguine; and sitting up, she drew the
      half‐wakened child close to her and kissed her with convulsive passion. Yet she let the maid
      carry off the little one, and merely let herself slip down on the couch with a moan, putting
      aside her heavy fur and passing her hands through her pale blond hair, and moaning.
“Don’t you think you had better go?” said Anne to Hamlin. “I will look after your cousin.”
      She would loathe to have Hamlin sitting there, looking at her, if she were in Madame
      Elaguine’s condition.
Hamlin rose.
“Stop a minute,” said his cousin faintly,
       turning round and fixing her vague northern blue eyes on
      him; “stop a minute, Walter.”
Hamlin remained standing, his eyes involuntarily fixed upon the curious spectacle of this
      prostrate little figure, panting and gasping as if going to die, and half unconscious of any
      one’s presence—her cloak thrown back on the sofa, her hair tangled, her bare arms and neck
      (for it was one of her caprices always to go the play, even to the pantomime, full dress) half
      covered by the fur of her pelisse and the lace of her dress.
“Stay a minute; I want to explain,” repeated the Russian, in a faint voice. “Anne—dear
      Anne—where are you?”
“Here I am,” answered Anne, in her cheerful strong voice; “do you want anything, dear Madame
      Elaguine?”
“I want you,” and Sacha flung her arms round Anne’s neck, and drew her dark
      head close to her own little pale yellow one. Anne felt her arms tighten passionately round
      her, her little hand tighten convulsively round her
       neck, as if the half‐fainting woman would throttle her,—but
      she felt no fear, only a vague, undefinable repulsion. Madame Elaguine sighed a long sigh of
      relief, and loosened her hold; but she kept Anne’s face near hers, and kissed her with hot
      lips on the forehead.
“Dear Anne,” she said, “forgive me.”
“There is nothing to forgive,” said Anne, trying to get loose and to rise to her feet. But
      Madame Elaguine kept her down in her kneeling posture, her arm always round Anne’s
      shoulder.
“I must explain it all to you,” she said, in a slow, vague tone, fixing her eyes upon
      Hamlin. “Don’t think me very foolish or mad; but I thought they were again trying to carry off
      my little Helen,—they have tried before,—and they keep writing to me, telling me that they
      will carry off Helen or kill me. I don’t care about that,—but Helen!” and Madame Elaguine hid
      her face in Anne’s iron‐black hair.
Hamlin looked on as in a dream. It was a
       curious sight, these two women, so different, and yet both
      so young and beautiful, the one clinging so to the other; and of the two, Madame Elaguine,
      whom he had never thought regularly handsome, with her thin, strange face, and red lips, and
      wild eyes, seemed to him at this moment the stranger and more beautiful of the two.
“I want to explain it all,” said Madame Elaguine. “Walter, give me that box—the little
      Indian inlaid one on the writing‐table—there, next to the palm‐tree.”
Hamlin brought the box; and Madame Elaguine, without letting go her hold of Anne, pressed a
      spring and opened it. It was full to the brim of letters—some large and folded in their
      envelopes, others mere scraps of paper. She took some out, and spread them on her knees.
“Look,” she said, letting Anne go, so that she could, while still kneeling, see the
      papers.
Anne raised herself, and Hamlin approached.
“Look at these,” said the Russian, carefully
       handling the soiled and crumpled pieces of paper; “these
      are to me what love‐letters are to other women,—they are my life—my past, and my future.” And
      she fixed her eyes wildly on Hamlin. “As other women have lived on knowing that they were
      loved and would always be loved, so I have lived, ever since I was twenty, knowing that I was
      surrounded by invisible enemies, who would either put a sudden end to my life or protract it
      with their tortures. Ah! I know you think me giddy, and fickle, and childish; but you don’t
      know that I try to lose my wits in order that I may gain some peace!” her voice burst out hot
      and passionate.
Anne and Hamlin were shyly fingering the papers; they were all in the same hand—a curious,
      crabbed, left‐handed character—some in French, some in English, some in Russian, but all brief
      and to the same purpose: initials of which neither Anne nor Hamlin understood the meaning at
      the head, and below a threat of something terrible, sometimes left vague,
       sometimes outspoken, as death, to what was styled the
      traitress. Many of them said that what could not be visited on the mother should be visited on
      the children, and all concluded with saying that wherever the traitress went she would be
      followed by invisible eyes and footsteps.
“It was all my fault in the beginning,” began Madame Elaguine, covering her eyes with her
      hands; “but I was very young, ignorant, and lonely; and after all, what harm did I do? I had
      been married when I was only seventeen to a man whom I thought of as a father; and little by
      little, when I found what sort of man he was—how base, and coarse, and cunning—I began to feel
      very lonely and empty‐hearted. I was too young to care for my children, who were babies, and I
      was a baby myself. But it was all so lonely, and the world so mean about me. I longed to be of
      some use, and able to sacrifice myself for something. And a man was sent across my path, twice
      as old as myself, whom I looked
       upon as a father, and who treated me as a child; and this
      man used to talk to me, when my husband left me all alone to run after low women, and tell me
      all about the miserable condition of Russia, and how all the good was being stamped out, and
      only selfishness, and injustice, and corruption triumphed. He was a Nihilist himself, and one
      of their chief men—a wonderful man, who seemed so cold, and just, and honest. So, little by
      little, he converted me to his ideas, and I got to know other Nihilists, men and women, and
      heard a great deal about all sorts of terrible doings. I felt so happy and heroic—I was a
      fool, you see. Then I suddenly discovered that my hero was quite different from what I
      thought—that he had gained all this power over me only in hopes of making shameful use of it,
      and had cornpromised me with his party merely to make me his mistress. When I understood it, I
      drove him away, and threatened to tell all to my husband; and then he swore to get the better
      of me, and to use all the power of his society to
       bring me, as he called it, to reason. For two years, while
      my husband was alive, I struggled with him, and he kept on threatening and hoping to frighten
      me. But when my husband died, I sold all the Russian property, and was preparing to leave the
      country, and then that man who hated me, just because in his way he had loved me, denounced me
      to his society as a traitor to the Nihilist cause, and as a person to be hunted down. And so,
      ever since, I have been persecuted with all the might of the Nihilists wielded by this man;
      and although I have been hundreds of times on the point of denouncing him and his associates
      to the Government, I have never done so, because I am still a Nihilist at heart, and hate the
      Russian Government as much as I hate him; and he, who knows it, knows I cannot defend myself,
      and employs his power in tormenting me.”
A convulsion passed across Madame Elaguine’s face; it dropped, like that of a dying person.
      But she started up suddenly, and went on with her story. For ten years nearly she had been
       persecuted in this mysterious way; threatening letters had
      come to her by all manner of conveyances,—brought by the post, found on her table, dropped by
      invisible hands at her feet. Attempts had been made to poison her, stopped just in time to let
      her know of them—for the object seemed rather to make her life unbearable than to take it
      away; burning spirits of wine had been poured under her door; twice she had been shot at. But
      the most terrible part of the persecution had come when they had discovered her passionate
      love for her little girl (the boy, now at school, they had somehow let alone). Several times,
      in various places (for she was always on the move, flying her enemies), attempts had been made
      to carry off the child; once, at Cannes, she had gone to the window just in time to see a man
      snatch up the child, who was playing in the garden, and to fire off a revolver at him.
“If I had killed my child,” said Madame Elaguine, savagely, “it would have been better than
      to see her carried away from me.”
The individual who had made these attempts she described as being very dark, as if his
      complexion had been altered by overdoses of nitrate of silver. And this man would every now
      and then, at unexpected moments, reappear, and his reappearance meant some fresh outrage. Poor
      little Helen had suddenly seen him, or thought she had seen him, among the crowd coming out of
      the theatre; and this had produced the child’s sudden fit.
“Ever since I have come to London,” said Madame Elaguine, “I have been comparatively quiet.
      I was almost forgetting all about my misfortunes, or thinking I was forgotten—and here it
      begins afresh;” and she burst into tears.
“Oh why, why cannot I be permitted to be happy for a little while—only a little while?” she
      cried.
Anne had listened awe‐stricken. She had always thought there was something mysterious about
      this giddy little woman. This frightful undeserved calamity struck down her
       imagination; what right had she ever to feel unhappy in the
      presence of such misery as this?
“Perhaps,” she suggested timidly—“perhaps it may have been Helen’s fancy. As she is used to
      the idea of this black man, she may have imagined, being tired and overexcited from the play,
      that she saw him among the crowd.”
“Oh no, no, it was he, really he,” moaned Madame Elaguine, turning over on the sofa and
      burying her face in its cushions.
“You must go now,” whispered Anne to Hamlin; “there is no earthly use in your staying. I
      will sit up with her till she be quiet. Good night.”
“Good night;” and Hamlin, as he noiselessly opened the door, cast a last glance at that
      singular group in the rose‐coloured light of his cousin’s lamp,—Sacha, with her fur and lace
      all in disarray, gasping on the couch, her bare throat heaving, and one of her thin white arms
      hanging loosely by her side; and Anne
       Brown, in her long plain white dress of high art simplicity
      of cut, stooping over her. For some time Anne sat by Sacha’s side, holding the Russian’s hot
      hand.
“Is Walter gone?” suddenly asked Madame Elaguine, turning her head.
“Mr Hamlin went some minutes ago.”
Madame Elaguine raised herself and sat up on the sofa, and passed her little hands through
      her disorderly yellow hair.
“Give me a kiss, Annie,” she said.
Anne stooped down and kissed her.
“Perhaps I had better go to bed now,” said Madame Elaguine.
“Shall I help you to undress?” asked Anne, who feared that Hamlin’s cousin might have
      another fit of hysterics.
“Oh no; call Sophie—she will undress me.”
On Anne’s call, the Swiss maid emerged from the next room.
“Put me to bed,” ordered Sacha, rising and leaning on the arm of the sofa.
“May I really not help you?” asked Anne, for the maid looked so indifferent, nay, so sulky,
      and she seemed to handle her mistress so roughly, that Miss Brown wondered how Madame
      Elaguine, in her state of nerves, could endure to be helped by her.
Anne waited till Madame Elaguine was in bed.
“I have made up the bed for Mademoiselle in the spare room,” said the maid, looking at Anne
      with a curious insolence; and she led her up‐stairs. Anne did not put out the lamp, and she
      did not undress. She could not sleep; and she felt miserable at the notion of Madame Elaguine
      being left all alone on the first floor. What if the little woman should wake up with a panic,
      if she were to fancy that some of her mysterious persecutors were hiding in her room? Anne
      took the lamp, and silently descended into the drawing‐room. All was quiet. She sat down in an
      arm‐chair, and made up the dying fire. She felt very restless and unable to sleep. The whole
      scene
       of this night and Sacha’s revelations had shaken her nerves
      and gone to her imagination. In her half‐drowsy, dreamy condition, everything seemed to her
      strange and eerie in this room, which was so unlike her own at Hammersmith. It was full of
      pretty things, but in great confusion; Sacha’s piano was still open, with a book of
      Rubinstein’s songs on it. There was a heap of dog’s‐eared French novels and recent volumes of
      poetry on the table, and the whole room was heavy with the scent of some Eastern drug and of
      Madame Elaguine’s Turkish cigarettes. On the table by Anne’s side were some books: she took up
      one, and opened it at random; it was Hamlin’s new volume. At the head of the page was the
      title, “Desire—XII. Sonnets,” and all along the margin was a faint line in pencil, and the
      words, in a childish hand, “How beautiful! and how TRUE!”
THE notion that a man was waiting, thirsting for her love, would have been enough
      for many a woman in Anne’s position—many a woman more gifted than Anne, and more conscious of
      her gifts, especially if the man who thus tacitly implored her to love and kindle love in him,
      were, like Hamlin, the former object of passionate worship. But with Anne Brown it was
      different. Some few women seem to be born to have been men, or at least not to have been
      women. To them love, if it come, will be an absorbing passion, but a passion only of brief
      duration, the mere momentary diversion into a personal and individual channel of a force which
      constitutes the whole moral and intellectual existence, whose object is an unattainable
       ideal of excellence, and whose field is the whole of the
      world in which there is injustice, and callousness, and evil. Such women may be very happy if
      they love a man with their eyes open—love him as a mere secondary concern, as a mere trusty
      companion in the struggle after the ideal; but if they love in a man what momentarily seems to
      be that ideal, if they love with all the force of their nature, a terrible reaction of vacuity
      and despair must soon come. As with their lovers and husbands, so also with their children:
      they cannot blissfully concentrate all their passion upon them; such love will soon become
      narrow and bitter for them. They are indeed sent into the world (if any of us is ever sent for
      any purpose) to be its Joans of Arc—to kindle from their pure passion a fire of enthusiasm as
      passionate, but purer than it is given to men to kindle: they are not intended to be, except
      as a utilisation of what is fatally wasted, either wives or mothers. Masculine women, mere men
      in disguise, they are not: the very
       strength and purity of their nature, its intensity as of
      some undiluted spirit, is dependent upon their cleaner and narrower woman’s nature, upon their
      narrowness and obstinacy of woman’s mind; they are, and can only be, true women; but women
      without woman’s instincts and wants, sexless—women made not for man but for humankind. Anne
      Brown was one of these. She had no idea that she was of this strange, rare stuff of heroines;
      she had no notion that she was at all superior to the ordinary run of her sex; indeed it was
      her perfect ignorance of her own exceptional nature which caused most of her wretchedness,
      making her at once more impatient with the weakness of others, and more impatient with her own
      difficulty of being satisfied. Love, therefore, was not for her a happiness, nor an ideal, nor
      even a compensation. In an intensely earnest nature like hers, a few years are worth a
      lifetime: everything is understood, endured much sooner; all that can be felt, for pleasure or
      pain, is rapidly exhausted, and the character remains
       early, with all its human lusts and vanities burnt out like
      the gases in green wood, ready to become the fuel for unindividual ideal passion. So at
      twenty‐three, Anne had, so to speak, loved out her love, her passionate adoring love, as she
      had dreamed out the dreams of her life; anything that might still come would be but a faint
      momentary flicker of sentiment, a detail in her life, and no more.
So when Hamlin had, in his veiled way, made her to understand what he hoped, what he
      desired, what he expected, what (she could not help saying to herself) he had bargained for,
      of her,—the thought of this love, which she could no longer feel, and which she was expected
      to give—of this love which was to be merely the highest selfish pleasure, the most precious
      (because the most refined), æsthetic lust of a selfish æsthetic voluptuary, Anne experienced a
      sense of horror and self‐debasement. So this was what Hamlin was waiting for—this which made
      him play that comedy of respectful distant adoration, of freedom of
       choice in her, of absence of all rights in himself—this
      that her solid mass of soul should slowly take fire, and smoulder, and, leaping up in
      inextinguishable flame, set him also ablaze.
Hitherto Anne had been unhappy from her isolation, from her gradual discovery that the man
      whom she had loved as an ideal of nobility must be scorned as a mere weak‐spirited and
      morbid‐minded artistic automaton,—a mind creating beautiful things from sheer blind necessity,
      as a violin gives out beautiful sounds, but soulless, like the mere instrument of wood and
      string. She had been unhappy because she was alone, terribly alone; but now she was unhappy
      because she had discovered that she was in bondage, surrounded by walls, a slave. And now that
      she yearned for the icy sense of isolation with which she had lived a few weeks back, as a
      prisoner in a fortress might yearn for the desert, she found also that she could no longer
      drift on indifferent, enduring the present, and hoping for the future. She could no longer
      vaguely say to
       herself, as she had so often said before, that Hamlin might
      be redeemed, that he might yet become once more an object of her love: for it had become plain
      to her that her future was settled; that whatever Hamlin was, he was her master, her
      proprietor; and that, lovable or not lovable to her nature, he expected, counted upon her
      love.
This new feeling made Anne’s life—that life which was so completely a life of the world
      within, not of the world without—insupportable in a new way. Isolated she could live, but not
      caged. Her whole soul sickened; she no longer thought of trying to influence Hamlin, of trying
      to help others; all her energies were concentrated upon helping, upon freeing herself.
“There is something the matter with Anne Brown,” said Sacha one day to her cousin. “What is
      it?”
“Miss Brown always looks very serious,” answered Hamlin, affecting indifference. “She has a
      tragic sort of face even when she is quite
       happy. It is one of her great peculiarities, and to me her
      charms; but for some time I could not realise that she was really happy.”
“That’s not it,” cried Madame Elaguine, impatiently. “I know Anne when she’s happy and Anne
      when she’s unhappy. She doesn’t look merely grave and tragic as she used to—she looks
      perplexed, and pained, and worried; she’s not happy in her life.”
“Miss Brown,” said Edmund Lewis, in his drawling, clammy voice, fixing his conquering eyes
      on Madame Elaguine with a quiet, insolent smile—“Miss Brown is a woman, although she looks
      like a goddess; and even goddesses, you know, could not help being women too.”
The Russian laughed. “Always the fatuity of these men!” she cried, and turned contemptuously
      on her heel.
Hamlin did not answer, but a feeling of satisfaction came over him. Anne was unhappy; and in
      a nature like hers, he said to himself, love must be unhappiness. But when he saw Lewis and
      his cousin alone he felt
       annoyed; and he fell upon their spiritualistic practices
      with a perfect rabidness of scorn.
Anne little knew that she was watched; she did not care what might or might not be thought
      of her by Sacha Elaguine, by Chough, by Edmund Lewis, by any of these people whom she
      despised; and as to Hamlin, an instinct told her that he would never guess what it was that
      troubled her. So Anne kept her pain to herself; but sometimes the despair of being thus
      enslaved became too strong for endurance, and she longed for some one to whom to confide it.
      Every word, every look, every piece of attention, every show of indifference on Hamlin’s part,
      seemed to mean the same thing: that he expected her to love him—everything seemed to allude
      and point to that. The only women with whom she was at all really intimate were the Leighs;
      but Anne could not say a word to them, could not ask their advice. She could never, she
      thought, make either of these girls enter into her situation, comprehend her feelings, make
       her understand that she was not ungrateful, and that Hamlin
      was not ungenerous. Yet she felt the terrible need of some one to counsel her—to take some of
      the frightful responsibility either of ingratitude or of degradation from off her—to show her
      either how to get out of the situation, or how to submit to it. Such a person there was—a
      person who might help her, who might even understand her; but something told Anne that she
      must not have recourse to him, to her cousin Dick. Perhaps it was vanity, perhaps a knowledge
      that Richard Brown would triumph over this miserable ending to what he had always opposed; a
      fear lest he might misunderstand Hamlin, and bespatter what was the one beautiful thing in his
      life—his raising up of Anne. For it was a curious point that, contemptible as Hamlin had
      become to Anne, and unworthy in her own eyes of her love, she could not endure the idea of any
      one else understanding this, of any one else attacking Hamlin. None of them, she felt, could
      understand what
       Hamlin had done for her; what he had been—nay, what, as a
      beloved piece of the past, he still was—to her; only she could measure what she owed to him,
      and only she, therefore, might weigh the bad in him against the good. For even when she was
      most overcome with the sense of the moral prison which was closing round her, to cripple her
      life and break her spirit, Anne could not wish that the past had been otherwise—that she had
      never met Hamlin, never contracted a debt towards him, never loved him. Bleak and dark as
      might be the present, she would not ever have given up that past,—that sudden flaming up of
      her life, that one spell of hope and trustfulness, and admiration and love, which must serve
      her for all her existence: to have had that was always sweet, to have been given it was always
      a reason for gratitude. Moreover, Anne could not now contemplate what she would have been had
      she never met Hamlin. To her stern and idealising nature, to have remained without knowledge,
      without
       responsibility, without sympathy, without sense of right or
      wrong, morally only half developed, only half alive, as she had been during her earlier
      girlhood, was unendurable. She would not, for all the pain and humiliation which it might cost
      her, have forfeited the finer fibre, the clearer vision which had shown her that she was
      indebted therefor to a man whom she despised. No; she could not, even in thought, relinquish
      the past. But what of the future? The question laid hold of Anne’s mind, and for some weeks
      rode it like an incubus. How many of us have thus let a hopeless problem get hold of our whole
      nature, and make it move, day after day, week after week, in the frightful treadmill of its
      vicious circle?
Every night Anne lay down to sleep with her doubts half solved, her mind half made up, only
      to wake up the next day with all her doubts reinforced and all her resolutions scattered. Such
      a condition is not due to weakness or indecision of character; nay, it is
       probably only the earnest minds, the most capable of
      serious decisions, who can thus go on living in suspense, resisting the temptation of a
      decision, enduring the monotonous recurrence of a struggle of motives and of thought; it is
      the effort, this frightful mental instability, at retaining moral life where life would easily
      be extinguished; it is the weary tramp up and down with cold cramped limbs of the prisoner who
      knows that were he to stop, were he to lie down, he would have rest, but also death. Almost
      unintentionally Anne kept asking herself what steps she could take to be free. She used, in
      moments of weakness and weariness of heart, to go over schemes of independence, to indulge in
      day‐dreams of self‐supporting liberty. She who, a few months ago, had dreamed of raising the
      lower classes, of spreading higher knowledge and ideals among them, of awakening the more
      fortunate parts of society to their sense of responsibility,—she whose whole energy had been
      taken up in silent projects for bettering, no matter how
       little, the world, bettering the poor by making them think
      and enjoy, bettering the rich by making them feel; giving the shop‐girls of the Women’s Club a
      glimpse into the world of imagination, and giving Hamlin a glimpse into the world of
      reality,—she was now thinking of how she might earn her bread, how she might live as a teacher
      or a governess. Talking with the Leighs and her cousin, she used shyly, and with a desire to
      deceive very foreign to her, to put questions, seemingly purely abstract, as to what a poor
      girl with a certain amount of education could best do—as to what was required of a
      schoolmistress or a governess. And, while telling herself that it was all useless—that she was
      bound by the past, however much she might try and cut herself loose from the present—Anne
      mechanically gave her time to studying, no longer to be more worthy of Hamlin, or more useful
      in the world, but to enable herself to gain a livelihood if . . . Ah! well, when she asked
      herself plainly what that “if” meant,
       she had to answer that she scarcely knew: if the
      slave‐owner should say to his slave,“ Go—I am tired of you;” if the man who had bought the
      precious statue or picture should weary of it and wish to exchange it. And Anne had to admit
      to herself that Hamlin was not the man to feel or act like this. Nay sometimes, when she had
      indulged in a day‐dream of freedom—when she had let herself go to the vain belief that Hamlin
      would one day awaken to the sense that this woman was not his ideal, as she had awakened to
      the sense that he was not hers—when she had worked out the details of her half‐starving life
      of independence, her return to her old drudgery (but with a freer spirit), her hard struggle
      as a teacher of little children, or a shop‐girl, or at best a schoolmistress,—the recollection
      of the past would suddenly overpower her—the recollection of what she had been, what she had
      hoped—the recollection of her love of that debt which she was now devising a means of paying
      off,—and poor Anne would burst into tears. But that debt, she
       felt, could not be paid off. She might support herself in
      the future, but how could she get rid of the past? If she lived on dry bread for the rest of
      her life, Hamlin would still have done for her what she believed that no other man had ever
      done for a woman; if she could save up every penny of earnings and place before him all that
      he had ever spent for her education, would it not be the basest, vilest mockery and cheat, and
      could she repay the love which he had felt, the trustfulness which he had shown? Repay it she
      never could; for love and trustfulness she could not give in return; and she must ever remain
      in his debt, remain his to do his bidding. And yet at times the question arose in her, What
      right had she to pay a debt at the price of her honour? To become Hamlin’s wife when she did
      not love him, to pretend love which she did not feel, this was in Anne’s eyes, measured by her
      stern measure of right and wrong, a prostitution; and could it be honourable to let herself be
      dishonoured? But Anne cast
       this thought behind her; Hamlin, by binding only himself
      and leaving her free, had by his chivalrous generosity really bound her; if to possess her,
      and as much of her life and love as she could give, would make Hamlin happy, he had a right to
      it.
The strain, Anne felt, was becoming too much for her; this question of her own future, of
      her own dignity and undignity, was swallowing up her whole nature, neither more nor less than
      the nature of Hamlin and his friend was swallowed up by their æsthetical feelings. Anne
      recognised, with terror, that she was deteriorating; that she was beginning to care nothing
      for others in this preoccupation about herself; and that such a thing should happen—that she
      too should lose her more generous feelings—was a greater degradation than any other which
      could come over her. This shame and this misfortune alone it was in her power to prevent, and
      she determined to prevent it. She did her best to put aside all questions of her own future,
      to accustom herself to wait for
       what might happen, what she might be summoned to do, and
      she threw herself with more ardour than ever (trying to escape from the contamination, not
      merely, as before, of the selfishness of others, but of her own) into such studies and
      questions as concerned wider interests than her own.
Anne’s earnest nature, lacking the happy faculty of being absorbed by present feelings, had
      always been very subject to a dull moral pain at the evil in the world, storms from the great
      Sahara of misery which would lower over her own oasis of happiness, clogging its atmosphere
      and blighting its greenness. But now her efforts not to brood over her own unhappiness,
      resulted merely in her brooding almost unceasingly over the unhappiness of others. And
      gradually, to the sense of the misery of the world, became superadded the terrible sense of
      the injustice of that world’s arrangements: from being indignant with the callousness of men,
      Anne became indignant, with the same cold and sombre indignation,
       at the callousness of God. She felt herself alone,
      isolated, separated not only from the men and women surrounding her, but separated in spirit
      from the whole scheme of things. And to her, the greater part of whose life was in her
      aspirations, this gradual removal of anything to which to aspire, this gradual destruction of
      every ideal with which to sympathise, such a condition of moral loneliness was, as Anne once
      said to her cousin, worse than death.
Richard Brown had somehow, that day, been more sympathising with Anne than usual. Had she
      not been too much engrossed, she might have noticed that he watched her face, listened to her
      words, not merely now with gentleness and friendliness, but with a kind of suppressed
      admiration and wonder.
“Nothing is so bad as death,” answered Richard; “because, once dead, we can no longer feel,
      we can no longer judge, or sympathise, or strive.”
Anne looked up from the frock which she
       was making for one of the little Choughs, whose wardrobe
      was getting into a lamentable condition.
“I don’t mean that we are so useful when we are dead, but we are less unhappy. You talk of
      feeling, and sympathising, and judging, and striving: what can we feel, and sympathise with,
      and judge, except the miserableness of men, and their weakness and badness, and the horrible
      arrangement of the world which makes them such? and after what can we strive, except vainly to
      release ourselves from that abominable order of the world?”
Richard Brown looked at Anne for a moment in silence. He was a singularly unæsthetic man,
      and confusing beauty with mere utility, he had never well understood the beauty which artistic
      people chose to see in this strange, uncommon, sombre face, so unlike that of any one else,
      and which seemed to have no prototype either in man or woman. But now he felt that Anne was
      beautiful, and very beautiful.
“All mankind is gradually releasing itself from what you call this evil arrangement of the
      world,” he answered; “or rather, the very perception that such an arrangement is evil is
      teaching mankind,—I mean all that much of mankind which makes the rest move on, to rearrange
      the world, and out of the bad to make the good.”
Anne shrugged her shoulders contemptuously.
“Why was the arrangement made if it was evil?” she asked.
“Because,” said her cousin, watching her face as he let his words drop—“because there was no
      sense of good and evil at the beginning; because it is only man who has conceived that the
      pleasure of others is good, and the pain of others is evil; and because, therefore, only man
      can be expected to reorganise the world so that the good of others be sought and the evil of
      others avoided. It is only man living with men, and feeling their miseries in his own, and
      their happiness in his own, who can be
       anxious for justice and impatient of injustice. How can you
      expect it of nature?”
Anne did not answer, but remained for a moment with her hands folded over her work, looking
      out of the window. Outside there was only yellow fog, and leafless spectral branches; yet her
      onyx‐grey eyes opened slowly, as if she were taking in some faint but glorious vision.
“What right have you to expect such feelings except from men and women?” went on Brown; “the
      gods, you know, have other things to do. I suppose,” he added bitterly, “that they had a
      godlike life like their representatives, the poets and artists, on earth, creating only for
      their amusement, and keeping every disagreeable sight, or sound, or feeling, or suspicion away
      from them.”
Anne was accustomed to such hits at Hamlin; they were too true to be refuted, and too
      spiteful to be accepted; and now she was too much absorbed to notice any of them.
“I don’t know exactly what you are driving
       at, Dick,” she said. “I don’t understand your theory about
      man and God, and right and wrong; it is misty to me. But still it seems—I don’t know how—as
      if, could I only understand it, it would make a great difference to me.”
“It must make a great difference to every honest person. You have no religion, Anne.”
“No. I thought religion was all bosh; merely a sort of silly pretty delusion, like love and
      all that;” and Anne thought bitterly how her own only religion, her love for Hamlin, her
      desire to become worthy of his goodness, had lamentably betrayed her.
“Without religion life is death,” said Brown, with his positivistic solemnity.
Anne looked at him contemptuously; she had so often heard people talk solemnly like that.
      Did not Hamlin talk in that way about the religion of beauty, and Dennistoun about the
      religion of love, by which he meant lust?
“It is all very fine; but I don’t much believe
       in religions. There is nothing worth worshipping; all is
      fetish, at best half silver and half clay.”
“You don’t believe in any religion, Anne, because you have never tried to find one.”
“I have looked in the Gospel, and in the ‘Imitation of Christ,’ and in my own heart, Dick;
      and what I have found there is ignored in the scheme on which the world is made; because I
      have read there of love and justice and mercy, and I have not found the love and justice and
      mercy which presided over creation.”
“I told you that the world was not made by man, and that it is man who has conceived good
      and evil. I always told you, Anne, that it was a great pity that you should read only books
      upon details of science, like political economy and so forth, and refuse to get general ideas
      of what is and what is not the belief of our age.”
“Detail knowledge—I mean knowledge of political economy and physiology and so forth—is
      useful; it can be applied, it can serve to
       make people a little less wretched. What is the use of your
      general ideas? Oh, I know; the religion of truth, the worship of ideas, &c., &c. I
      don’t see that it is a bit nobler to worship truth than to worship beauty; your religion of
      science is only another form of selfish æstheticism: your friends hanker after knowledge, as
      my friends hanker after beautiful pictures, and music, and poetry, and women; and as my people
      dignify their appetites with the name of religion of beauty, so do yours sanctify theirs as
      the worship of truth. All that merely makes the world more cold and black in my eyes.”
“These general ideas,” answered Brown, “are what prevent me from being as wretched as you
      are. Do you call that useless?”
“That is just what Mr Hamlin says about beauty, and Chough about the Eternal Feminine. But I
      don’t see that the world gains by this devotion.”
“I know nothing of Hamlin’s or Chough’s
       opinions,” interrupted Brown, impatiently; “but I know that
      if you permit yourself to continue in this kind of pessimism you will enervate your soul,
      Anne. It seems very noble and austere, and all that sort of bosh; but there is just the same
      fascination in it as there is in any morbid excitement, and just the same debasement of the
      individual in indulging therein.”
His words seemed to go through Anne. Was she becoming selfish, weak, self‐indulgent? The
      terror of it sickened her. And was everything, however noble it seemed—love, beauty, nay, even
      her indignation at the world’s evil—only a snare?
“Will you teach me, Dick?” she said, after a moment. “I don’t much believe in your
      religion—positivism, I suppose it is—for all religions seem to me to turn out, oh, so empty,
      after promising so much. But if you will tell me, or give me books to read, you know I will do
      my best to understand.”
“You are a noble girl, Anne,” said Brown
       half audibly, fixing his eyes on Anne’s. “I did not think
      there was a woman so strong, and truthful, and fair‐minded as you—well—in the whole
      world.”
“You always think people base, Dick,” she answered sadly. “It is a wretched mistake, but not
      so bad a one for yourself as always to think them noble.”
Richard Brown lent Anne a number of books, and he often came of an evening when Hamlin was
      gone to Madame Elaguine’s spiritual séances (for despite his
      scepticism he found himself attracted by the mysticism with which Edmund Lewis had easily
      infected his cousin), and talked them over with her. He took her also to hear the lectures of
      a friend of his, a red‐haired young man of genius, dying of consumption, who had for truth and
      righteousness a passion such as other men may have for sport, and who was the chief preacher
      of the secular and scientific religion with which Brown was imbued, and with which he was
      seeking to imbue Anne. Anne
       was not so quick in being converted as her cousin had
      expected; she was slow of thought, and her earnestness, her honesty, perhaps also a painful
      remembrance of so many other deluded hopes, made her sceptical. But, little by little, Anne
      was converted; and, as her cousin had foretold, she was happier. The world and its
      contradictions became simpler in her eyes, and she became once more confident of good.
      Moreover, what Brown never guessed, her new faith in the triumph of right, her new belief in
      the necessity of doing one’s duty for the sake of mankind and of progress, had at once given
      her a more serene determination to accomplish her duty towards Hamlin; and, what was more
      important, it had taken away her thoughts a little from her own position of impotence and
      isolation and probable degradation. And perhaps, unconsciously also to Anne, she felt less
      isolated now: she felt as if in this rough, brutal, vain philanthropist, who was so honest,
      for all his petty vanity, and who was so desirous
       of her good, despite all his former contemptuousness, she
      had gained what she had never had, and had yet always vaguely wanted,—some one for her to
      understand and to understand her, to help and be helped by—not an ideal being to adore as she
      had adored Hamlin, but a good, wholesome, strong reality whom she could love as a brother.
“I owe a great deal to you, dear old Dick,” she said one day, taking his hand; “I am so glad
      I would not let you continue to despise me.”
Brown flushed, and his cynical smile failed him. “Despise you? Oh Anne, how could I—” he
      exclaimed. But suddenly he checked himself.
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
WHILE Anne was being indoctrinated with her cousin’s philosophical theories, Hamlin
      had little by little let himself be drawn into the little clique of more mystical and Bohemian
      pre‐Raphaelites whom Edmund Lewis had collected round Madame Elaguine. The old‐fashioned,
      long‐established æsthetes, who believed that artistic salvation resided solely in themselves
      and their kith and kin, and who strangely muddled together the theories of an esoteric school
      and the prejudice of the untravelled Briton, decidedly set their face against Madame Elaguine.
      They had not liked Anne Brown
       because she was not sufficiently engaging; but they
      thoroughly hated Sacha Elaguine because she was too fascinating.
“A nasty, ignorant, frivolous little woman,” said Mrs Spencer, who was the spokeswoman of
      the party; “a woman with no sense of responsibility whatever. Did you hear the way in which
      she spoke of those horrible French painters? That she actually dared to talk to papa about
      that Monsieur Page, vulgar, base creature that he is!”
And the older people, and the women of the æsthetic world—the spinsters with dishevelled
      locks and overflowing hearts, who kept little garlanded lamps before the photographs of puny
      English painters and booted and red‐shirted American poets, all agreed with her. But the
      younger men merely laughed, and neglected the solemn, smut‐engrained parlours of Bloomsbury,
      the chilly, ascetic studios of Hampstead, for Madame Elaguine’s curious, disorderly, charming
      house in Kensington—the house patched up with old lodging‐house
       furniture and all manner of Eastern stuffs and brocades,
      crowded with a woman’s nick‐nacks, strewn with French novels and poems, and redolent of
      cigarettes and Russian perfumes. For there was in this delicate, nervous little creature,
      eaten up with love of excitement, something which acted as a spell upon most men; and it was
      curious to see how she managed to make them all in love with her, and at the same time excite
      no jealousy.
“Do you think Circe’s pigs were jealous of each other?” asked Mrs Spencer, when this
      peculiarity was pointed out to her by Chough. “Reduce people to a certain level, and they will
      be satisfied with equality.”
Lewis explained it as being due to Madame Elaguine’s magnetic power. Whether the Russian had
      been fully converted to his spiritualistic theories, or, indeed, whether it was possible to
      make her believe seriously in anything, it is impossible to say. But she had caught the
      spiritualistic infection from Lewis as a tinder catches fire. Nothing in the world
       could suit her better: spiritualism appealed to her love of
      excitement and mystery, to an idealistic and mystical strain which made her hanker after
      strange supersensuous contacts and occult affinities; moreover, if ever there was a woman of
      whom one might believe that she could vibrate with disembodied passion, and come in contact
      with an uncorporeal world, it was this emaciated, nervous, hysterical creature, who lived off
      coffee and cigarettes, and lived, as it seemed, only with her restless mind, and not at all
      with her frail, incapable body.
“I feel sometimes,” she would say to her friends, “as if I mixed with the living as smoke
      mingles with air—seeing them move before me, but unable to clutch them or be clutched by them,
      coming in contact only with their passions. I feel as if I could more easily live with the
      dead—mix more easily with them. It is terrible. I sometimes fancy that I shall fall in love
      with some dead creature, and my life be sucked away by him,”—and she gave a little
      shudder.
Cosmo Chough listened spell‐bound with admiration, twisting and untwisting his long black
      whiskers. What a woman was this! And he ruminated over a new chapter of his Triumph of
      Womanhood, of which Sacha Elaguine—“Sacha quite short,” as she bade her friends call
      her—should be the heroine.
Edmund Lewis smiled his sensual lazy smile, which one knew that he imagined to be the
      prototype of the cruel and lustful mysterious smile of the men and women, and creatures
      neither one nor the other or both, who came from beneath his fantastic pencil.
“Has it never occurred to you,” he said, in his luscious voice, stooping over Madame
      Elaguine’s chair, “that you may rather be a dead creature yourself—a vampire come to suck out
      some one’s life‐blood?”
“Confound that Lewis!” thought Chough. “Why must such ideas occur to him, a mere damned
      painter, and not to me, who am a poet?” and he made a note of the vampire.
Hamlin was standing by, smoking his cigarette
       sullenly. He did not like these sort of liberties which Lewis
      took with his cousin; he had even of late warned her that, although his friend was an
      excellent fellow, too great intimacy with him might prove disagreeable to her.
“What a carrion‐feeding fancy you have, Lewis!” he exclaimed, frowning. “One would think you
      lived on corpses, in order to be more in harmony with those beasts of spirits of yours.”
Lewis laughed triumphantly; but Madame Elaguine, to his amazement, cut him short by
      saying—
“Your idea may be very amusing, Mr Lewis; but I don’t think it is exactly the style of thing
      for a man to say to a woman.”
Lewis, who was never abashed, merely raised his eyebrows.
“I thought you were superior to your sex,” he answered.
“If Lewis dare to talk to you like that,” whispered Hamlin to Sacha, “I shall horsewhip him
      one of these days.”
Madame Elaguine pressed his fingers in her little hot hand.
“You are good,” she answered, in what was like the buzz of a gnat, but infinitely caressing;
      “but poor Lewis means no harm: he is very bon enfant. You
      are too pure and proud to understand other men. Ah, Anne is a happy woman!”
The last words were scarcely more than a little sigh to herself; but Hamlin caught them, and
      reddened.
“Anne is very cold,” he said briefly; then added, as if to justify himself in his own
      eyes—“I suppose all very passionate natures are.”
Sacha shook her little thin childish head.
“Oh no—not all.”
Miss Brown went but rarely to the house of Hamlin’s cousin. She was extremely sorry for the
      poor little woman’s misfortunes; and asking herself what she would have been had she had
      Madame Elaguine’s past, she often admired how the Russian had kept her independence and
      self‐respect, and serenity and cheerfulness.
       Yet, while she believed herself fully to appreciate Sacha,
      and invariably defended her against the jealous prudery of Mrs Spencer and her clique, Anne
      somehow felt no desire to see much of her. She set it down to her own narrowness and coldness
      of temper. “I am too one‐sided to have friends,” she used to say to Mary Leigh; “I feel that I
      don’t do justice enough to people, however much I try, and that my heart does not go out to
      meet them enough. I think I would do my best for them; but I can’t love them or be loved.”
Poor Mary Leigh was silent. Anne—this beautiful noble, distant, somewhat inscrutable
      Anne—was the idol of the enthusiastic Irish girl. She had often longed to tell her so; she
      longed, at this moment, to put her arms round Anne’s neck, and say quite quietly—“I love you,
      Anne;” but she had not the courage. How much may this sort of cowardice, called reticence,
      cheat people of? The knowledge that there is a loving heart near one, that there is a creature
      whom one can trust, that the world
       is not a desert,—all this might be given, but is not. And
      the other regrets, perhaps throughout life, that word which remained unspoken, that kiss which
      remained ungiven, and would have been as the draught of water to the wearied traveller.
Anyhow Anne, while thinking that she liked Madame Elaguine, somehow did not care to see much
      of her. What she could do for her she did willingly. Madame Elaguine wanted the child to learn
      English, but made a fuss about letting her have a governess.
“My child’s mind must be my own mind,” she said. But as she went on grieving at little
      Helen’s ignorance, and her own incapacity, from want of schooling and want of strength, to
      teach her, Anne offered to teach the child together with the little Chough girls, who were
      still her pupils. Madame Elaguine was rapturously grateful; but Helen was so completely
      spoilt, that she could be brought to Anne only when she fancied it herself, and Anne found her
      so demoralised that she really
       did not like to bring her in contact with the Choughs. “When
      poor little Helen is ten, then you must moralise her,” Madame Elaguine would say; and Helen
      was within week of being ten, and Anne, much as she disliked asking Madame Elaguine anything,
      urged that she should begin to be taught. Moreover, Anne’s time was too much taken up reading
      under Richard Brown’s directions, and her thoughts were too much preoccupied to make her feel
      at all sociable, even had she not felt an instinctive repugnance to the sort of company,
      headed by Edmund Lewis, which she knew she would meet at Madame Elaguine’s.
However, one evening she could not refuse Sacha’s invitation, more especially as the latter,
      evidently to please Anne, had invited her friends the two Leighs. It was a grand
      spiritualistic séance. Madame Elaguine was in great
      excitement, and Edmund Lewis was radiant. But Hamlin looked bored and pressed.
“I hate all this vulgar twaddle of spiritualism
      ,” he said impatiently to Anne. Anne loathed it: the
      triviality disgusted her, the giving up of one’s will to another revolted her, and she could
      not understand how a woman could endure to be handled and breathed upon by a man like Lewis.
      Mary Leigh was half excited and half amused; Marjory, the strong‐minded scoffer, had
      determined to unmask some sort of trickery. The séance, to
      which Edmund Lewis had brought a famous professional medium, was very much like any other
       séance: a darkened room, a company of people partly
      excited, partly bored; expectation, disappointment, faith, incredulity; moving of tables and
      rapping, faint music, half visible hands.
“The whole boxful, machinery complete, all the newest tricks, eighteenpence,” as little
      Thaddy O’Reilly fiippantly remarked to Anne. How could Madame Elaguine have patience with such
      rubbish? wondered Miss Brown. What excitement could that excitement‐loving little woman, with
      a real mystery in her own life, find in all this stale shibboleth?
“You can’t think what a strange, delightful sensation I have at these moments,” said Sacha
      to Hamlin, as her little soft hand touched his. “I seem to feel the whole current of your life
      streaming through me, and mingling with mine. It is like an additional sense. Do you
      understand that, Anne?”
“No,” answered Anne, briefly. “I feel Mr Hamlin’s fingers touching mine, and that’s
      all.”
Hamlin somehow admired Anne’s answer; he was glad it was so,—had she felt like his cousin,
      something would have spoilt in an ideal of his; and yet Anne’s coldness annoyed him.
“The spirits are reluctant; there are too many sceptics in the room,” said Edmund Lewis,
      angrily. “Great as is the power of some of us—as, for instance, of Madame Elaguine—I feel that
      there is something acting as a non‐conductor,—some very chilly nature here.”
But nevertheless, when the company was giving up the séance as spoilt, mysterious sounds were heard, and something luminous, which was
      immediately identified as a pair
       of spirit‐hands, was seen to float over the table.
“Spirit‐hands!” whispered Edmund Lewis.
“Wash‐leather gloves painted over with luminous paint,” whispered Thaddy O’Reilly.
“A wreath!” whispered Madame Elaguine.
Something round, like a wreath, did seem to float, supported by the spirit‐hands. Some said
      it was oak, others cypress, others myrtle; but it soon became apparent that it was bay.
“For Hamlin!” whispered the guests to each other.
The wreath floated unsteadily over the heads of the party; but, as it passed Marjory Leigh,
      that evil‐minded young materialist quickly snatched at it, but it was whisked away by the
      indignant spirits. There was a murmur of indignation; but indignation turned into triumph when
      suddenly the wreath reappeared, and hovered for two good minutes over Hamlin’s head. There was
      a cry of admiration, and Madame Elaguine clapped her hands.
But Marjory Leigh struck a light, and lit the candle by her side. She could see faintly the
      excited faces all round, and among them the pale face of Anne Brown, scornful and angry, fixed
      upon that of Hamlin, who was flushed, hesitating, surprised.
“I am glad the spirits have such good taste in poetry,” said Marjory Leigh, quietly; “but it
      is a pity that they should not have crowned Mr Hamlin, like Petrarch and Corinne, with real
      laurels.” And she stretched out something in the palm of her hand. Every one crowded round,
      and took it up by turns.
It was a leaf, torn and broken, of green laurel which she had pulled off when the crown had
      passed over her; but the green laurels were masses of stamped paper, and left a green stain in
      the hand.
“It does smack a little of a French pensionnat de
       demoiselles distribution of prizes; you will get the little book dorésur tranches, ‘Avec l’approbation de Monseigneur l’Archevêque de
      Tours,’ and ‘Prix décerné à M. Walter Hamlin
      ,’ written inside, at the next séance,” cried Thaddy O’Reilly. “Well, it is consoling to see how our beloved dead
      keep up the simple habits of the living.”
There was a titter. Madame Elaguine burst out laughing. Hamlin laughed, but he looked black
      as thunder.
“You brought that piece of green paper with you!” cried Lewis furiously at Marjory Leigh.
      “You brought it to insult and delude us! It is disgraceful.”
“My dear Lewis,” said Thaddy O’Reilly, gently, “remember that you are still a gentleman, and
      not yet a spirit.”
“Had I known that there was to be any crowning, I should certainly have brought something
      better than paper laurels,” said Marjory, fiercely. “I never thought spirits were reduced to
      such expedients as these.”
The séance came to an end. The lamps were lit. The medium
      dismissed with considerable contumely. Edmund Lewis went away in a huff; and Madame Elaguine,
      who
       cared in spiritualism only for those strange thrills which
      she had before described, laughed a great deal about the matter, and settled down to make
      music with Cosmo Chough.
Hamlin looked as if he wished himself a thousand miles away. He would speak with no one; he
      was angry with his cousin for having let him in for such a ridiculous scene, and angry with
      the rest of the company for having witnessed it; he had no command over his looks; and while
      Madame Elaguine’s curious, warm, childish voice throbbed passionately through Schumann’s
      songs, or while people took their tea and talked, he sat aside, in the doorway of the next
      room, like a whipped child.
“What a baby Walter is!” whispered Madame Elaguine, laughing, to Chough.
But Anne did not laugh. She felt the humiliation not of the paper laurels, but of that
      radiant look which she had seen in Hamlin when the lights had first been lit. And she was
      indignant with Hamlin for taking
       this ridiculous business so tragically, and at the same time
      sorry for his poor, wounded, unsympathised‐with vanity. She left the piano, where she had been
      sitting near Sacha, and went to him where he sat disconsolately looking over a heap of
      newspapers in the next room.
She did not allude to the scene. What use was it chiding him? He could never understand. She
      talked to him about the picture which he was painting, about the people, anything to make him
      feel that she was sorry for him. Hamlin was bitter against his friends; he began once more his
      tirades against modern art and poetry, its lifelessness and weakness; he again declared
      himself longing for a different life; he again, passionately and delicately, called upon Anne,
      in his veiled way, to redeem him. Anne listened sadly. She knew it all so well by heart, this
      vain talk which was to be the daily bread of her soul.
Suddenly Hamlin’s eye fell upon Marjory
       Leigh, who was seated talking with Thaddy O’Reilly in the
      recess of a window.
“I wonder you can endure that girl, Miss Brown!” he cried, “much less make her your
      friend.”
“Marjory may sometimes be rude, and it was perhaps not very good manners to interrupt the
       séance as she did, although I quite sympathise with her;
      but she is a capital girl, and just one of the most trustworthy persons I know.”
“She is a humbug!” exclaimed Hamlin, crossly and violently. “Doesn’t she set up for
      philanthropy, and self‐sacrifice, and all that? and then she goes to parties dressed in that
      way—a fit beginning for the wife of an East End curate, for a man like Harry Collett!”
“Marjory’s dress does not cost more than Harry Collett’s coats,” answered Anne, quietly.
      “You men never understand such things, and think because a girl’s dress is showy that it is
      expensive. Of course Marjory doesn’t wear æsthetic things, and it would be absurd if she
       did; but I happen to know that she made that particular
      dress entirely with her own hands.”
“I know nothing about the dress, except that a wife of Harry Collett’s should not go about
      like a peacock. But I do know,” cried Hamlin, fiercely, “that it is disgraceful for a girl
      engaged to marry, and to marry a man like Harry, to sit the whole evening in a corner, letting
      a jackanapes like O’Reilly make love to her.”
“Marjory has been sitting with Mr O’Reilly only about ten minutes,” answered Anne,
      indignantly, “and she has known him ever since they were babies. I think it is too ridiculous
      if a girl can’t talk to a young man at a party without being treated as if she were committing
      an infidelity.”
“I don’t say that any other girl talking to any other young man is to blame,” said Hamlin,
      still hotly; “but I say that a woman who can let O’Reilly flirt with her throughout the
      evening is no wife for Collett; and I have
       a good mind to write and tell him so,” and Hamlin looked
      dignified.
Anne did not answer at first. She was filled with contempt for this vain childish
      ill‐humour, which was taking the proportions of rabid hatred.
“Marjory is my friend,” she at last said, “and I think that the less you talk such nonsense
      as about writing to Mr Collett, the better.”
“I will, upon my word!” exclaimed Hamlin. “Marjory Leigh is a friend of yours, but she is an
      infamous flirt all the same!”
“Why does Mr Hamlin glare at me like that?” asked Marjory of Anne a little later. “One would
      think it was my fault that the spirits crowned him with paper laurels and not with
      bay‐leaves.”
ANNE had forgotten all about the séance, when,
      about a week later, Mary Leigh arrived at Hammersmith in a state of extreme excitement.
“What is the matter, Mary?” asked Anne, wondering at her flushed face, which was usually so
      quiet.
“Nothing—nothing,” said Mary Leigh, looking impatiently at some visitors who were present.
      “I spoilt two copper plates this morning, and shall have no etchings worth exhibiting. I
      suppose that has put me out of sorts.”
But the visitors had scarcely turned their backs, when Mary Leigh turned suddenly towards
      Miss Brown.
“Oh Anne dear, a dreadful, shameful thing has happened! and I have come to you to know what
      it means, because I can’t help thinking that Mr Hamlin has had something to do with it, and
      poor Marjory is so miserable.”
“What is it?” asked Anne, a vague terror coming over her.
“Why, Marjory got this letter to‐day from Harry Collett; he has been staying with his mother
      at Wotton for the last week. Read it, and you will understand.”
Miss Brown took the letter, evidently much pulled about and read and re‐read, from Mary
      Leigh, and smoothed it out and read it slowly; while her friend sat by, looking anxiously at
      her face.
The letter was from Marjory’s intended. Harry Collett told her, with a dignity and
      gentleness, a desire not to hurt the one who had hurt him, and an incapacity of hiding his
      great pain, which nearly made Anne cry, that his eyes had at length been opened to the
      undesirableness of a marriage
       which, however much wished for by him, could not satisfy all
      the claims of a nature llke Marjory’s.
“Much as I have looked forward to our marriage,” wrote poor Harry, “I could not possibly be
      happy if I suspected that it did not give you everything which you have a right to require
      from life. I thank God for having sent me a warning in time, for having let me understand what
      your generosity and my infatuation would have hidden to me—namely, that your thoughts have,
      despite your will, turned elsewhere; that your nature requires a life of greater cheerfulness
      and variety than I could hope to give it. And, indeed, I am beginning also to understand that
      I was trying to reconcile the irreconcilable—that a man who has elected a life among the poor,
      has no right to share its privations with any one, much less with any one dear to him; and I
      see that I was on the verge of committing the sin of sacrificing your happiness to my
      vocation, or rather to my unmanly desire to
       have the hardness of my vocation sweetened at your expense.
      Please do not fancy that I think at all badly of you; I think badly only of my own
      blindness.”
But the poor curate’s angelic nature could not resist the temptation of a fling at his
      supposed rival.
“I am only surprised—but my surprise may be due to my ignorance,” he added, “at the person
      who engrosses your thoughts. I should never have thought you could seriously care for a
      shallow creature like O’Reilly. I wish you to be happy, but I fear you will not be solidly
      happy with him.”
“Do you understand?” cried Mary Leigh, impatiently; “some one has written to Harry some
      horrid lies about Marjory and Thaddy O’Reilly. Oh, I think it is too shameful! Marjory, who
      has not seen Thaddy O’Reilly more than twice in the last six months; and,” added Mary Leigh,
      with an agony in her voice, “I fear—oh, I fear—Anne, that it must have been Mr Hamlin who did
      it.”
Anne did not look up from the letter. She was very white, and her face full of shame.
“I fear it must,” she answered, half audibly.
“But what is the meaning of it?” cried Mary. “What can Mr Hamlin know about the matter? Why,
      he scarcely ever sees Marjory. I don’t believe he had seen her for nearly six weeks before
      that party at Madame Elaguine’s. Oh, Anne, do you think it is Madame Elaguine, that horrid
      little Russian, who did it?”
“Oh no,” answered Anne, quickly, “I know Sacha Elaguine has not done it; I don’t believe she
      is capable of doing it.”
“Then you think? . . .”
“I fear—I fear Mr Hamlin did it.”
There was a dead silence. Poor Mary Leigh was torn by her indignation for her sister, and
      her pain at the shame cast upon her admired Hamlin, and through him upon her adored Anne.
“What can I do? If only I knew the grounds of the accusation,” she said desperately
      , “I know I could explain them away to Harry. I know that
      Marjory could, but she won’t.”
“Has Marjory not answered Mr Collett?”
Mary Leigh shook her head.
“Marjory is too proud and self‐willed. She is disgusted with Harry. She won’t hear his name
      mentioned; it is useless. Oh, it is dreadful to see people who care for each other so much
      separated in this way, by a mere vile groundless calumny, which one cannot even refute.”
Anne passed her hand across her forehead.
“Mr Hamlin has done it,” she said slowly, and with an effort, “and he must undo it.”
“How can one make him undo such a thing?” cried Mary, hopelessly.
“I will tell him that he was wrong, and make him write to Harry Collett.”
“Oh Annie dear, you are good”—and Mary Leigh threw herself on Anne’s neck—“for I know how
      dreadful, how terrible it must be for you to tell him that he has acted badly.”
“It is not the first time,” answered Anne, mournfully. “Leave me the letter, will you, Mary
      dear?”
Mary Leigh left the letter with Miss Brown; and that evening, as Anne was sitting with
      Hamlin after dinner, she suddenly dashed into the subject.
“Do you remember saying, the other night, at your cousin’s, that you would write to Harry
      Collett about the flirtation which you took it upon yourself to imagine between Marjory Leigh
      and Mr O’Reilly?” asked Anne.
Hamlin looked puzzled.
“I remember something or other,” he said evasively.
“Did you write to Harry Collett?”
“I had occasion to write to Collett about some books I had left at Wotton, and which I
      wanted him to bring up to town on his return.”
“But did you mention about Marjory and Mr O’Reilly?”
“I may have”—Hamlin spoke absently—“yes, I suppose I did. What of it?”
“What of it?” cried Anne, indignantly; “why, this much, that you have made two people
      perfectly miserable, and that Marjory’s marriage with Mr Collett is broken off,” and she
      handed him the letter.
Hamlin looked at it with an air of puzzled indifference.
“I don’t understand what it’s all about,” he said, coolly and serenely, returning the letter
      to Anne.
“Then you did not say anything about Marjory to Mr Collett?”
“Yes—I did—I certainly think I did. I can’t exactly remember what it was. You know how one
      writes letters; one forgets the next day.”
Anne looked at him with wonder. So after having, momentarily at least, made two people as
      unhappy as was well possible, this was how he took the revelation of the results of his
      doings.
“Mr Hamlin,” said Anne, sternly, “you know that you never believed that Marjory Leigh was
      really flirting with O’Reilly; and you know that you wrote to Harry Collett, and made him
      believe that she cared for another man.”
“I don’t know anything about Miss Leigh’s doings. I remember noticing her talking very
      assiduously that evening with Thaddy. Perhaps it was all fancy of mine; I have no doubt it
      was. I just mentioned it to Collett as I might mention anything else. I never dreamed that it
      would annoy him.”
“You thought it would merely annoy her?” asked Anne, reproachfully.
“I really know nothing about the matter. I’m not responsible for what I may have thought or
      written a week ago, much less for all these complications, which I never dreamed of.”
“Did you suppose, then, that Harry Collett would be utterly indifferent to being given to
      understand that Marjory cared for another
       man, and was not the fit wife for an East End curate, as you
      expressed it?”
“I don’t know. I wrote, and thought no more about it. If they have gone and quarrelled about
      it, I’m very sorry—and that’s all I can say.”
Hamlin’s tone was bored and slightly impatient. He had evidently not the smallest shame or
      regret for what he had done.
“Since you are sorry—since you did write that to Collett,” said Anne, trying to
      speak as gently as possible—“you will, I trust, do what you can to repair this mischief.
      Marjory Leigh is too indignant with Harry to answer him at all. Will you write to him and tell
      him that it was all a mistake—all owing to your having been annoyed with Marjory on account of
      that laurel crown business—and that there was no foundation for all you said? You will make
      amends, won’t you? Do write at once.”
Hamlin had risen from his seat, and his face had taken a curious obstinate look.
“I’m very sorry I can’t obey you, Miss Brown,” he said, “but it appears to me that you wish
      me to write myself down a liar. If these people choose to fall out because of a word of mine,
      I see no reason to apologise. It is their concern, not mine.”
“Was it your concern to write to Collett, then? Was it your concern to take such a
      responsibility?”
“Every one may write whatever passes through his head. I thought Miss Leigh a flirt last
      week; I don’t now. As to responsibilities, I repudiate such things.”
“No one can repudiate such things,” cried Anne. “You have done mischief, and with a few
      strokes of the pen you can repair it. Oh, you must write, Mr Hamlin—you must.”
“If I write,” answered Hamlin, hotly, “I shall just tell Collett that I do
      think Miss Leigh a flirt. I cannot refuse to write, but I refuse to eat my words. Have you
      paper and a pen?”
He had gone to Anne’s writing‐table. Anne put her arm over it.
“You have told a falsehood once, you shall not tell it twice,” she said.
“I said that merely to show you how impossible your request was. After all, my dear Miss
      Brown, a man does owe something to himself and to his name, and there is such a thing as
      proper pride.”
“Is there?” answered Anne, and the words were like drops of freezing water. “I thought,” she
      added, the remembrance of what he had answered when she had entreated him not to slander
      himself in those sonnets “Desire,” “that your school considered it legitimate for a man to say
      that he had committed no matter what baseness, even those which he had not. But I see,” and
      Anne’s indignation blazed up, “that you want sometimes to be considered wicked, but that you
      succeed only in being mean.”
“I think that is a little hard upon me,” he answered mournfully and bitterly, and left the
       room. He was thinking of all he had done for Anne—all that
      he had done and left undone.
Anne remained seated, looking into the fire, for some moments. Then she went to her desk and
      took paper and an envelope.
“DEAR MR COLLETT,” she wrote slowly, “Mary Leigh has just shown me your letter to Marjory,
      which has greatly shocked and grieved me. As I know that the person who misled you about
      Marjory and Mr O’Reilly, between whom there has never been a shadow of a flirtation, is Mr
      Hamlin, I feel bound to tell you, not only that to my knowledge Marjory has not seen Mr
      O’Reilly except once since your departure; but also, as having been present on the occasion of
      the supposed flirtation, that Mr Hamlin imagined the flirtation, and wrote to you about it
      merely because he was in an ill temper, and because Marjory had annoyed him that evening by
      detecting a fraud in the spiritualistic séance in which we
      were engaged. Mr Hamlin has himself just told me that he
       does not any longer believe in the flirtation, and had no
      notion of creating any mischief. So, as he is not writing to you himself, I feel bound to tell
      you the real state of affairs, and I trust you will immediately let Marjory know that your
      suspicions were groundless, as she is very unhappy, and indignant with your letter.—Believe
      me, dear Mr Collett, yours sincerely, ANNE BROWN.”
Anne stopped several times in course of writing, and read and re‐read her letter. Hamlin had
      refused to make amends; well, she must make them for him: the matter was simple, and it was
      Anne’s character, whenever she saw the right course, to take it without hesitation, however
      painful to her. Like many very honest and firm people, she had something destructive in her
      temper; she could, as Sacha Elaguine had said, sacrifice herself and others with a sort of
      sullen savage satisfaction. It was a humiliation for Hamlin, but he had deserved it; it was a
      bitter humiliation for herself, but her
       debt of gratitude towards Hamlin forced her to take the
      consequences of the bad that was in him as well as the good. To admit that Hamlin had, from
      mere womanish ill‐temper, calumniated a friend, wantonly and thoughtlessly made two loving
      natures mistrust each other, and that he had then refused to repair the mischief of his own
      making,—this was intolerably bitter to Anne; still it had to be done. She put the letter on
      the hall table, and bade the servant post it without delay. Then she felt the full ignominy of
      the matter; and her whole nature recoiled from Hamlin’s. Nay, it did not recoil; there was no
      reality to shrink from. Anne no longer felt horror as she had done when he had given her that
      poem about Cold Fremley; she rccognised that his fault was negative, that his moral evil was
      moral nullity—the utter incapacity in this man, who had acted so chivalrously towards her, of
      perceiving when he was doing a mean thing. And the thought that she would be chained for ever
      to the side of a man whose whole
       nature was merely æsthetic, who was wholly without moral
      nerves or moral muscles, filled her with despair.
The next day, Hamlin sent word that he had to go and see some pictures at Oxford, and would
      be away for two days. Anne felt a vague hope that he was ashamed of himself. Madame Elaguine
      called, and with her came Cosmo Chough. The conversation, to Miss Brown’s annoyance, turned
      upon the spiritualistic séance of the previous week.
“What a fool Walter is!” exclaimed Sacha. “Fancy his moping in a corner because the spirits
      crowned him with paper laurels! I can’t understand a man not having more brass, not putting a
      better face on things. But Walter is a curious creature: in many respects he is not a man but
      a child. He has seen a great deal of life, and yet in many things he is like a girl of
      fifteen.”
“Mr Hamlin,” said Anne, evasively, “has an essentially artistic nature; the realities of the
      world don’t appeal much to him.”
“Unless an artist feel the realities of the world,” said Madame Elaguine, eating some of the
      petals of the roses that were at her elbow, “his art will be very thin. Life must stain the
      artist with its colours, or his art will be tintless.”
Anne had often said those same words to herself; yet somehow she knew that in Sacha
      Elaguine’s mouth they had a different meaning; and she felt it, when, with her curious,
      half‐childlike, and yet infinitely conscious smile, she turned to Chough.
“Don’t you think so, Signor Cosmo?”
Cosmo Chough pretended that he understood, as he always did, whenever he thought that
      passion and the Eternal Feminine were in question; he tightened his black moustachioed lips
      into a long grimace, and bowed in deferential agreement.
“Of course,” said the little man, sticking his single eye‐glass in his eye, “we all know
      that our friend Hamlin will never get out of life all that perfume, that narcotic and
      bitter‐sweet
       fiavour, which some other men taste, to be poisoned for
      ever, with their first mouthful of honey. Hamlin is, in some respects, a little more and a
      little less than a man.”
“A goose, in short,” laughed Sacha.
“He is, purely and simply, an artist. Passions, senses, all the things which belong to other
      men’s personality, belong to him only as factors of his art. And this is perhaps not to be
      regretted, but to be rejoiced in. There is terrible danger of the artist being swallowed up by
      the man. Of the poets whom God sends on earth, two‐thirds are lost to mankind: their passions,
      which should be merely so many means of communication between their soul and the universe, eat
      them up; or rather they feed themselves on what should become the world’s honey. And even of
      those who are not lost entirely, how many are there not whose lives are engulfed by passions;
      to whom, alas! what they sing is but the wretched shadow of what they feel!” And Chough
      sighed, and fixed his eyes on his
       lacquered boot‐tips, as much as to intimate that he, who
      lived on mutton‐chops and spent his life nursing an epileptic wife, was of that Caliph Vathek
      kind.
Madame Elaguine laughed; but Chough thought it was at Hamlin, and frowned.
“Herein lies Hamlin’s advantage; he is the pure artist. And, mark me,” he said, looking
      fiercely around him, “he is none the worse for that. No, rather the better. I know no man to
      compare with Hamlin as a mere person; to compare with him not merely in genius, but in
      kindliness of temper, in purity of soul, in delicacy of thoughts. He is not merely a great
      artist, but a work of art; he is like a picture of Sir Galahad vivified, or like a sonnet of
      Dante turned into flesh—and I think Miss Brown will agree with me.”
“Mr Hamlin,” said Anne, slowly, “is a very generous man and a very chivalric man, and,” she
      added, feeling as if Madame Elaguine were looking into her soul, and as if she must read
      ingratitude written in it, “I feel that I am
       indebted to him not merely for all he has done for me, but
      for the way in which he has done it—”
“Oh no, no!” exclaimed the polite little poet, to whom Anne was quite the goddess, “don’t
      say that, Miss Brown; you can never owe anything to any one. Whatever a man can do, is a
      tribute which his nature forces him to lay down at your shrine.”
“Yes,” mused Madame Elaguine, following out the pattern of the carpet with her parasol
      “indebted—that is how one must feel towards Walter—indebted for the pleasure, &c.,
      &c., of so charming an acquaintance; but love—one can’t love where there is only artistic
      instinct to meet one—”
“I know nothing about such matters,” said Anne, quietly.
“But, perhaps—Hamlin may be a sort of child of genius, and the man, the man who feels may
      come later,” finished the Russian.
“When people don’t feel, they don’t feel,” said Anne, sternly; “I mean—morally.”
“By the way,” exclaimed Chough, “I am reading such a delightful book—have you ever read it,
      Madame Elaguine?—The Letters of Mademoiselle Aïssé—”
“Who was Mademoiselle Aïssé?” asked Anne absently, forgetting that experience had taught her
      that it was safer not to inquire too curiously into Mr Chough’s heroines.
“I suppose she was some improper lady or other—all your poetic ladies were, weren’t they?”
      asked Madame Elaguine. “Something like your Belle Heaulmière, whom you insisted on talking
      about at poor Lady Brady’s party, although I kept making signs to you the whole time.”
“Improper?” exclaimed Chough. “Mademoiselle Aïssé was the soul of virtue—the purest woman—of
      the eighteenth century.”
“Tell us about this purest woman of—the eighteenth century,” laughed Sacha.
“She was the daughter of kings; her name was originally Ayesha, like the wife of the
      Prophet—but she became a slave, and was sold as
       a child to M. de Ferréol—I think that was his name—who was
      ambassador at Constantinople. M. de Ferréol sent her to his sister‐in‐law in Paris to educate.
      Aïssé grew up the most refined and accomplished woman,—you should read her letters—perfect
      gems!—and marvellously beautiful. Life was just opening to her, and love also, when M. de
      Ferréol returned from Constantinople, and said to this exquisite, proud, and pure‐minded
      creature: ‘You are my slave; I bought you, I educated you; now love me.’”
Chough paused and looked round him to watch the effect of his eloquence. But his eyes fell
      upon Anne. She was very white.
“Well—and what did Aïssé answer?” asked Madame Elaguine.
“Aïssé answered—let me see, what did Aïssé answer?—oh, I should spoil your pleasure were I
      to tell it you. I will bring you the book, dear Madame Elaguine, and you shall tell me what
      you think of it.”
Anne felt that she had betrayed herself. To Sacha, she hoped, she believed not—but to
      Chough. The little poet, in his trumpery way, was really attached to Anne, whom he considered
      as his guardian angel; and perhaps his affection had made him understand.
“What became of Mademoiselle Aïssé?” asked Anne, some time later, as she stood by the piano
      where Chough was playing.
Chough looked up. “Oh—why—she—in short—afterwards—she died.”
“Would you like to see the book?” asked Madame Elaguine; “I have some others on hand at
      present. Mr Chough shall send it to you—”
“Oh no, thank you,” answered Anne, “I have a heap of books to get through; and—I don’t care
      what happened to Mademoiselle Aïssé.”
“You are very hard‐hearted, Anne.”
“She would not have objected to M. de Ferréol if she had remained a mere little Turkish
      slave‐girl; she would have thought
       him a sort of God. She had no business to let her education
      make her squeamish.”
“A nasty old ambassador!” said Madame Elaguine. “I think it was awfully hard
      upon her, poor thing! And was she in love with some one else, Mr Chough?”
WHEN Chough first told her the story of Mademoiselle Aïssé, it was as if Anne had
      been suddenly confronted by her own wraith, surrounded by strange and tragic lights; and the
      shock was very violent. But Miss Brown was too honest not to see after a minute that between
      her and Aïssé there was an unfathomable difference. M. de Ferréol was a mere experimentalising
      old roué, who had had a mistress prepared as he might have
      had a goose fattened; and what he claimed of Aïssé was her infamy. Anne’s conscience smote
      her; she was very ungrateful. And she thought over all those scenes at the Villa Arnolfini, at
      Florence, nay, here in England not so long ago; she thought of Hamlin’s
       generosity and delicacy of mind—of the quixotic way in which
      he had bound himself while leaving her free—of the chivalrous way in which he had dowered her,
      making her feel almost as if all this money, which placed her on his own level, was her own
      inheritance, and not his charity. She remembered all the respect, which was more of a brother
      than of a lover, with which he treated her—the constant manner in which he hid all her
      obligations to him, never letting any taunt or harsh word of hers get the better of his
      resolution that Anne should feel that she owed nothing to him, and that he craved for her love
      as he might have done for that of a queen. And it came home to her how pure, nay, how
      poetically and romantically noble was the love which he asked for; and she felt almost wicked
      when she reflected that what he wanted was to make her into the very highest thing which a man
      can make a woman—a sort of Beatrice, a creature to love whom will be spiritual redemption. All
      these things did Anne say to herself; but
       it cost her an effort, and the strain could not be kept up.
      The fact was that she had, in her terror of being unjust, refused to listen to her own plea.
      But it came back to her like an overwhelming flood. She could not love Hamlin; her soul
      recoiled from contact with his as her body might have recoiled from the forced embrace of a
      corpse: such a union, it seemed, would mean the death of her own nature. To be Hamlin’s wife,
      to spend all her life by his side, hopelessly watching his growing callousness to everything
      for which she felt born,—to feel one generous impulse after another gradually waxing feebler,
      one energy after another for good becoming paralysed by the deathly moral chill of his utter
      heartlessness,—was this not much worse than any mere dishonour of the body, this prostitution
      of the spirit? Aïssé’s soul at least was free; her Ferréol could not deprive her of her moral
      freedom, her aspirations, her powers of self‐sacrifice; but with her, Anne Brown, it was
      different. And she repeated to herself with bitterness the
       warning words which Richard Brown had spoken in vain so
      long, long ago: “You will be his to do what he chooses; worse than his slave, his mere chattel
      and plaything.” How little Dick had guessed the much more terrible meaning which these words
      would come to have for her!
Unconsciously Anne’s mind reverted to the business of Marjory and Harry Collett; and her
      mind’s eye rested for a moment upon those two lovers, to each of whom, through whatsoever of
      discrepancy there might be, the other represented his or her highest ideal, that other’s
      opinion his or her highest conscience; not passionately in love, like Othello and Desdemona,
      or Romeo and Juliet, but persuaded to their inmost soul that in living by each other’s side,
      and sympathising with and helping in the other’s work, each would be fulfilling his or her
      best destiny in the world. Another woman situated like Anne might have let herself be tempted
      into cynicism by unconscious envy; but this was not
       within Miss Brown’s honest, and open‐eyed, and stern nature.
      She never once said to herself—“Marjory and Harry will awake one day from their dream.” She
      had dreamed, alas! and had awakened; but she recognised that these two were broad awake, and
      that their happiness was a reality. Anne looked at these two lovers for a moment, but without
      any envy or bitterness. It never even entered her mind to covet their happiness, to imagine
      that she might have a right to anything similar. Anne, though leaning towards socialism in her
      theories, was not in the least a communistic mind; she did not ask, “Why should I not get the
      same advantages as my neighbours?” She envied no one the prize in the lottery; she begged only
      for a chance. To be the wife of a man whom she loved, and who loved her—to be the companion
      and helpmate of some one who was striving after her own ideals; such hankerings had never
      passed through her mind—or, if they had, they had long since been banished. What
       Anne longed for, what her soul hungered after, was merely
      negative freedom. Freedom to sympathise and to aspire—to do whatever little she still might to
      carve herself out a spiritual life of her own, no matter how mean and insignificant; freedom
      to live in that portion of her which was most worthy of life. To gain her bread, no matter how
      harshly; to be of some use, to teach at a school or nurse at a hospital; nay, to be able
      merely to encourage others to do what she might not,—this was all that Anne asked; and this,
      in her future as the wife of Hamlin, as the queen of this æsthetic world, which seemed to
      poison and paralyse her soul, was what she knew she could not have, what she knew she must do
      without.
“I am a selfish brute,” she suddenly said to herself, “wasting the time which is still
      mine,”—and she took down her books of political economy, and tried to fix her attention upon
      them, and think out a scheme of the lessons and exercises which she would give to the
      shop‐girls at the Working Women’s Club.
       But what was the use of doing this? Hamlin, she knew,
      loathed the notion of her teaching at the Club; he would never let her teach there; and, once
      his wife, she understood him sufficiently to be fully aware that he would consider himself
      completely empowered to make her do or leave alone whatever he chose.
Still Anne tried to work on courageously. In the afternoon she went to hear one of Professor
      Richmond’s lectures. This was the fervent young positivist whom Cousin Dick so much admired,
      and whose intense moral convictions had done a good deal to keep Anne out of the slough of
      desponding pessimism round which she had been some time hovering. Andrew Richmond was a man
      who had many slanderers, many of whom he has now left behind him—their misrepresentations
      having been more long‐lived than he; for he had passed through many phases of thought, and,
      being perfectly honest, he had never been able to become unjust to any, and thus had made
      enemies not merely among the men whose
       beliefs he had abandoned, but among those also whose beliefs
      he had accepted without accepting their follies. He stood very alone; and it was perhaps this
      isolation—this obvious indifference of the man to all save his own reason and conscience—which
      added to the solemnity of his convictions; and made him appear, more than any one else, in the
      light of a priest of morality, of a prophet of the advent of justice. Anne had never spoken to
      Richmond; but she felt that, of all human souls, this one did the most to keep up the courage
      of her own. This was one of the last discourses which the poor dying positivist ever
      delivered; and it was the more earnest for the sense of his approaching end. He spoke this
      time, or, as his ridiculers called it, he preached upon the relation of duty to progress; upon
      the value of each good impulse carried out, and each evil one resisted, in making morality
      more natural and spontaneous in the world; and he insisted especially upon the danger, to
      people whose ideas of right and wrong rested
       no longer upon any priestly authority, of the individual
      sophisticating himself into the belief that in yielding to the preferences of his own nature
      he was following the highest law, and that any special usefulness ought legitimately to be
      bought at the expense of departing from the moral rules of the world.
“The danger of our epoch of moral transition,” he said, “lies in the temptation of the
      individual to say to himself—‘If I am willing to sacrifice myself, have I not a right also to
      sacrifice the established opinions of others?’”
“I detest that man Richmond,” Madame Elaguine had once said; “he puts an end to all
      self‐sacrifice.”
“If you mean the sacrifice of one’s peace of mind and social dignity to the passion of
      another person and to one’s own, he certainly does,” Richard Brown had answered sternly.
At the door of the lecture‐room Anne met her cousin.
“Are you driving to Hammersmith?” he asked.
“No; I am going to walk.”
Anne had made it a rule for the last two or three months to deprive herself of all luxuries.
      She did not wish to enjoy everything that she had a right to; she had also a stern pleasure in
      doing the things most repugnant to her; and a walk through the London streets, in murky spring
      weather, was to Anne’s Italian temper, nurtured with æsthetic delicacy, one of the most
      disagreeable of expeditions.
“But it is drizzling and horribly muddy,” said Richard Brown, looking at her as he buttoned
      her ulster over her massive figure. “Surely Hamlin will be very much shocked if you come into
      the house with mud on your shoes? But if you are really going to walk I will accompany you, if
      you don’t mind, because I’m going in that direction.”
“Where are you going?”
“To Hammersmith; I have some business there.” And Brown looked once more at his cousin as he
      opened his umbrella over her.
“Will you take my arm, Anne?” Richard
       Brown was not a lady’s man, and there was something awkward
      and unaccustomed in his request.
“I am big enough to take care of myself, I think, Dick. And I know you hate having women to
      drag along; I have watched you going into dinner‐parties often enough.”
“It is out of my line, you’re right.”
For some time they walked along in silence through the black oozy streets, crammed with
      barrows of fruit, round which gathered the draggled dripping women, their babies huddled up in
      their torn shawls, their hair untidy and dank beneath their once lilac or pale‐pink
      smut‐engrained bonnets; the cabs, shining blue‐black, ploughed through the mud; the heavy
      drays splashed from gutter to gutter; the houses were black and oozy; the very raindrops on
      the railings looked black; the sky was a dirty dull‐grey waste; only the scarlet letter‐boxes
      stood out coloured in the general smutty, foggy, neutral tint.
“Do you remark that public‐houses are the
       only places which make an attempt at architecture and
      ornament?” said Dick grimly, as they passed the ground‐glass windows and colonnade and
      coloured glass globes of one of these establishments. “Did it not strike you, Italian as you
      are, that in this country, which has invented high art, the only things called palaces, except
      those inhabited by royalty, are pot‐houses? Why do your æsthetic friends keep all their
      æstheticism for indoors? Why don’t they build themselves houses which will be some pleasure to
      the poor people who pass?”
Always that indirect attack upon Hamlin and his friends: it was just and reasonable; yet,
      coming from Brown, it somehow grated upon Anne.
“That will come later,” she said. “The first thing is that the upper classes become
      accustomed to beautiful things. You can’t expect them to mind hideous outsides to their houses
      if they are indifferent to hideous insides. I don’t think,” she added boldly, “that
       æstheticism has had much generosity of aspiration in it so
      far, except in isolated men like Ruskin and Morris; but I am sure it will eventually improve
      some matters even for the lower classes.”
“Nero rebuilt Rome, didn’t he,” sneered Brown, “after he had amused himself burning it
      down?”
They fell to talking about the lecture, and then about Richard Brown’s plans.
“I hope to get into Parliament next elections,” he said, “and then I shall retire from Mr
      Gillespie’s firm.”
“Why? They say you can make a big fortune if you keep on.”
“I have quite money enough; I am a rich man. You wouldn’t have thought that possible, would
      you, Nan, two or three years ago? Almost as rich as Hamlin, do you know, young woman?” and he
      turned and looked at her. There was a curious expression, what she could not understand,
      except that it was defiant, in Dick’s face.
“I am glad to hear it. It is a fine thing to have money; it enables one to do generous
      things—like what Mr Hamlin did for me, for instance.” Anne could not have explained why she
      felt bound, at this particular moment, to throw Hamlin’s generosity in her cousin’s face.
“Ah, well,” answered Brown, suppressing something he had been about to retort, “of course I
      could not formerly have done what he did for you; but I would have gladly spent every shilling
      I had, Anne, to educate you, so that your father might have been proud of you.”
“I know you would, Dick—you are very kind.” And yet, thought Anne, until he had been piqued
      by Hamlin’s offer, he had forgotten all about her. “But why do you intend to leave your
      business?”
“Because I want to give myself up entirely to studying social questions, and my business
      would suffer if I gave it only partial attention.”
And he proceeded to explain the various questions which he intended studying, the
       various evils into whose reason he wished to look.
“Reform has been too much the leisure‐time amusement of men,” he said. “People have thought
      that it requires less training to touch, nay, to sound, social wounds, than to set a broken
      arm or dress a wound. We must find the scientific basis for our art. And it is a very, very
      long art, and life is very, very short. For my part, I feel that my knowledge is to what it
      should be what the knowledge you may get out of a school primer of physiology is to the
      knowledge required by a great surgeon. I don’t suppose I or any of my generation will succeed
      in doing much practical good; but we shall have made the public ready for certain views on our
      subjects, and rendered it easier for our practical followers to get their education. There is
      nothing very glorious to be done at present: no giving out of brilliant new ideas or making of
      successful revolutions; only patient grubbing at facts and patient working on the public
      mind.”
“Is that enough for an ambitious man?”
“One must pocket one’s ambition. What we want is knowledge, not conspicuous
      personalities.”
Anne was silent. Dick’s words were like military music to her. Oh to be able to join him, to
      march by his side, to carry his arms!
“Go on Dick, please. It does one good to hear of these things.”
Dick went on.
“You must not overwork yourself,” said Anne, anxiously. “Just think if you were to break
      down, as so many men have done—as poor Richmond is doing.”
“Oh, I am strong. The only thing which concerns me is my sight. I find I am already unable
      to read of an evening. There’s no danger of blindness, but the doctor says I must not work by
      candle‐light. Oh, there’s no mischief. I shall engage a secretary. I know plenty of young men
      who would come, even for a small salary. There is the son of one of our head workmen, a very
      intelligent
       lad, of whom I am thinking; but perhaps he is not
      sufficiently educated yet. I must have some one who knows German and French, and so
      forth.”
Anne felt a lump in her throat. Oh that she had been a man, instead of being this useless,
      base creature of mere comely looks, a woman, set apart for the contemplation of æsthetes! If
      she had been a man, and could have helped a man like Richard Brown!
“But I am not certain of my plans just yet,” added Brown, and he dropped the subject. They
      walked on for some moments in silence; then he began questioning her about Lewis, and Chough,
      and Dennistoun.
“Chough is a dear good little man,” said Anne; “he is very absurd and vain, and fond of
      talking and writing about wicked things, which I am sure he doesn’t understand any more than
      I. But he is so self‐sacrificing, and warm‐hearted, and true. Dennistoun, poor creature, is
      very morbid and faddy, and, I think, hates me; but I am very sorry for him.
       As to Lewis, he may be a very good man, but I don’t like
      him—”
“I suppose you have heard what people say,—that Mr Lewis had rather a bad influence upon
      Hamlin some years ago—in short, made him take to eating opium, or haschisch, or something
      similar?”
“No—I had never heard that,” and Anne seemed suddenly to understand her instinctive horror
      of Lewis.
“Does Hamlin see much of him now?”
“A great deal—more than I can at all sympathise with. Lewis is rather a sore subject between
      us; he knows I don’t like him, and yet he is very fond of him.”
“I suppose Lewis flatters him very much.”
“I suppose so.”
Anne resented being thus cross‐questioned about Hamlin, but she was quite unable to
      prevaricate in her answers—her nature was too frank, and Richard’s questions were too
      direct.
“You are not very happy with Mr Hamlin,” he suddenly asked, or rather affirmed.
Anne flushed, but did not answer at once. “I have an unlucky temper,” she said, after a
      moment. “I am too exacting with people. I can’t get out of my own individuality sufficiently,
      I fear.”
Richard looked at her with pity, and at the same time with that implacable scrutiny of
      his.
“You feel your nature narrowed by all this æsthetic world around you,” he said. “You find
      these men selfish, mean, weak, shallow—”
“Chough is not selfish. As to Dennistoun and Lewis, I told you I disliked them.”
“You are equivocating, Anne. You know I am not speaking of Dennistoun, or Lewis, or Chough.
      You find that Hamlin drags you down, freezes all your best aspirations.”
Anne turned very white and trembled.
“Mr Hamlin is a poet, an artist; he is not a philanthropist or a thinker. But he has done
      for me more than I believe any man has ever done for any woman.”
“But—you don’t love him?”
Richard had stopped as they walked along the Hammersmith embankment. It was a very quiet
      spot, and not a soul was out in the thin, grey, drizzly fog.
Anne hesitated for a moment.
“I feel very much attached to Mr Hamlin on account of his generosity towards me—and I feel I
      can never repay it.” She did not look in Brown’s face as she answered, but stared vaguely at
      the river, at the dripping trees, the grey willow branches pulled backwards and forwards by
      the grey current; at the houses opposite, and the boats dim in the fog.
“You don’t love him?” repeated Richard in a whisper. “Anne, answer me.”
“I don’t see what right you have to ask me such a question, Richard.”
“No? Well, I do—and you shall see why. You are not his wife; why should you try and tell
      lies? Do you or do you not love Hamlin, Anne?”
Anne looked for a moment at the swirling waters, at the willow twigs whirled hither and
      thither.
“I suppose I do not.”
There was a pause.
“You do not love him, and you still contemplate marrying him?”
“I contemplate nothing at all. Mr Hamlin has not yet asked me to marry him, and perhaps he
      never may.”
“Nonsense, Anne. And when he does ask you, what will you answer?”
“I shall answer Yes. I am bound to do it. Mr Hamlin has done all, all for me. If he wish to
      marry me, I cannot refuse him the only thing which I can give in return for his
      generosity.”
Richard Brown burst into a strange shrill laugh.
“The only thing which you can give in return for his generosity!” he exclaimed, but always
      in the same undertone. “Who first made use of those words, Nan? The only
       thing which you can give in return for his generosity! Did
      not some one use those very words to you, long, long ago in Florence, when Mr Hamlin first
      proposed to educate you, and your cousin said that you were running the risk of selling
      yourself? But, by God! you shall not sell yourself, Anne. Do you know what you are giving him
      in return for what you call his generosity?—that is to say, in return for the whim which made
      him educate a beautiful woman, that he might show her off and have a beautiful wife, if he
      chose. Do you know what it is? Your love, eh? You have none to give; you have said so
      yourself. Your body? your honour? Nay, every prostitute, every kitchen slut can give him that.
      And I suppose such things do not exist for a delicately nurtured lady, a ward of Mr Walter
      Hamlin’s. No; you are giving him your soul, selling it to him, prostituting it as any common
      woman would prostitute her body.”
“Richard,” said Anne, hotly, “you are my
       cousin, and have been very good to me, but that gives you no
      right to insult me.”
“My words are ugly; and what are the things which you would do? Anne, you shall listen to
      me,” and he laid his hand heavily on her arm.
“You can make me stand here,” she answered icily, “but you cannot make me listen.”
“I can make you listen. Oh, Anne,” and his voice became suddenly supplicating,
      “do not be womanish, and refuse to listen because I speak disagreeable things. Answer me, on
      your honour: have I a right to let you sacrifice your happiness, your honour, your usefulness
      in the world, to let you defile and ruin all these, by becoming what is equivalent to a mere
      legalised mistress—the wife of a man whom you despise? You have a debt towards Hamlin: I grant
      it, though you must be well aware how little real generosity there was in his choice of you;
      but you have a debt also towards yourself. You have no right to pay for Hamlin’s kindness by
      the falsehood, the
       degradation, of marrying a man whom you do not love, by the
      sacrifice of all the nobler part of your nature which that man will crush out in you.”
“If there is anything noble in me, Dick, no one can ever crush it out; and I do not see what
      real degradation there will be in honestly carrying out my part of a bargain which has been
      honestly carried out towards me.”
Richard paused for a minute.
“But,” he cried, “you mistake, Anne; you forget what that bargain was.”
“No, I do not. Mr Hamlin promised to marry me whenever I should ask him to do so, and—”
“And he left you free, perfectly free to marry him or not as you pleased!”
“He left me free; and it is just that generosity of his, in binding himself,
      and not me, which obliges me, if he wants me, to say Yes.”
“That is an absurd quibble, Anne. If Hamlin’s leaving you free bound you all the more, why,
      then, he did not leave you free, and you
       need not be bound by a piece of magnanimity which never
      existed.”
“On the contrary, you are quibbling, Dick. You know very well that Mr Hamlin
      meant to leave me free; and it is for this intention that I am, more than for anything else,
      grateful.”
Richard turned round.
“Fool that I am!” he cried, “to believe in you and not see through your woman’s
      tergiversation! You say you do not love Hamlin, but you do; you may despise him, feel his
      emptiness—I grant it all—be dissatisfied with him. Oh, I know it! But you love him all the
      same, and you would not for the world give him up, even if he asked you to.”
Anne laughed bitterly. “The usual generalisations about women. Because I will not do a
      dishonourable thing, I must needs be a self‐deluding fool. No; I do not love
      Hamlin. I love him no more than this!” And Anne broke a twig off a bush and threw it into the
      stream.
“You do not? Then, if Hamlin were to release you,—if he were to say, ‘I want to marry some
      one else,’—would you—would you not regret him, his poetry, his good looks, his fame, his
      fortune?”
“It would be the happiest day of my life!” cried poor Anne, despairingly.
“Then that day must come. Anne, I cannot see you sacrificed. I cannot see you lost to
      yourself and to the world. You must not marry Hamlin. I will provide for you; I
      will take care of you. You shall help me in my work!”
“Poor Dick!” said Anne gently, touched by this enthusiasm, “you are very good; but I fear—I
      fear I shall never have any need of your help; and I would never burden another man—never have
      a debt again—if I were remitted this one.”
“You would have no debt,” cried Brown. “Anne, I am not a woman’s man. I don’t know how to
      say such things. But ever since I have got really to know you, I have felt if
       only I could have such a woman as that always by my side—to
      tell her all my plans, and be helped in all my work . . .”
Richard looked straight before him: Anne could see his face quiver. A coldness came all over
      her: a coldness and a heat. She felt as if she must cry out. It was too sudden, too wonderful.
      The vision of being Richard Brown’s wife overcame her like some celestial vision a fasting
      saint. But she made an effort over herself. “I am bound, bound,” she said; “but if ever I be
      released . . . ”
She hesitated: the longing for what she knew herself to be renouncing was too great.
“Anne,” cried Richard, seizing her hand, “I love you—I love you—I want you—I must have
      you!”
It was like the outburst of another nature, a strange, unsuspected ego, bursting out from
      beneath the philanthropist’s cool and self‐sacrificing surface.
That sudden contact gave Anne a shock which woke her, restored her to herself; it
       horrified her almost. She made him let go her hand.
“If ever I be released,” she said, “I will remain free. I do not love you, Dick.”
She was sorry the moment after she had said it.
“I have gone too far,” cried Richard.
“Good‐bye,” said Anne. “We have been talking too long—and—you won’t resume the subject, will
      you?”
There was a command, a threat implied in her voice. Brown somehow felt ashamed of
      himself.
“Not since you wish it,” he said flatly.
“Good‐bye,” said Anne. And she walked away and entered the house—Hamlin’s house.
THE sudden revelation of her cousin’s feeling was more than a shock, it was a blow
      to Anne. In her loneliness, in her dreary waiting for the hour of sacrifice, Richard Brown’s
      friendship had, almost without her knowing it, been her great consolation and support. It had
      given her a sense of safety and repose to think that, in the midst of all the morbid passion
      and fantastic vanity which seemed to surround her, there was a possibility of honest
      companionship, of affection which meant merely reciprocal esteem and sympathy in the objects
      of life; wholesome prose in the middle of unhealthy poetry. This was now gone: Richard Brown
      loved her, wanted her; it was the old nauseous story over again; the sympathy, the
       comradeship, the quiet brotherly and sisterly affection had
      all been a sham, a sham for her and for himself. Was Mrs Macgregor right, and was there, of
      really genuine and vital in the world, only the desire of the man for the woman and of the
      woman for the man, with all its brood of vanity and baseness, and all its trappings of poetry
      and sympathy and self‐sacrifice? Anne looked round her, and she saw men like Chough and
      Dennistoun and Lewis, base or doing their best to become it; Hamlin, her girlish ideal of
      poetical love, had gone the same way; and now the one man who had remained to her as an object
      of friendship and respect, her cousin Dick, had preached against selfish æstheticism, had
      talked her into his positivistic philanthropy—had conjured her to respect her nobler nature,
      her soul, her generous instincts—had supplicated her not to degrade herself,—nay, had quibbled
      with right and wrong, had urged her to break her trust,—what for? that he might satisfy his
      whim of possessing her. The solitude and the
       chilliness around Anne had increased; she wished for good,
      but she disbelieved in its existence. Add to this that she felt she was now no longer at
      liberty to see so much of Dick as she had formerly done; instead of a consolation and a
      support, his presence seemed to her now more of a danger and an insult. So she waited,
      hopeless and solitary, for the hour of the sacrifice to strike; for Hamlin to claim her. To
      fulfil that debt, to suffer that moral death‐blow, seemed to her now the one certainty, the
      one aim of her life.
Such was the bulk of Miss Brown’s condition; but there were streakings of another colour
      which made it, on the whole, only more gloomy. The possibility, the vision which had for a
      moment been projected on to her mind, of becoming Richard Brown’s wife, of sharing in all
      those thoughts and endeavours which were her highest ideal, would return to her every now and
      then in strange sudden gleams. And this possibility, or rather this which was an
      impossibility, made the
       real necessity of her life only the gloomier for the
      contrast. Anne had vaguely aspired after a life of nobler sympathies and stronger aims, but
      she had never gone so far as to dream of sharing the life of her cousin; and she thought that,
      had matters been different, had she been free, had Hamlin not claimed her, had Richard not
      loved her (for his love, his selfish tempting her away from her duty, seemed to her a sort of
      dishonour to him and her), she would have had the fulfilment of her most far‐fetched desires
      within her grasp,—merely increased moral numbness, the sullen pain of resignation, towards a
      fate which was too slow in coming.
Anne did not pay much heed to Hamlin and his doings: it seemed to her, whose life in the
      last months had appeared like years, that it was always the same monotony; Hamlin was waiting
      for her to fall in love with him, watching whether she was not in love already; offering her,
      in those vague, Platonic, elegiac speeches of his about the necessity of
       a higher life of which he no longer had much hope, of a pure
      passion which he feared he was unworthy to experience, an opportunity for saying “I will teach
      you how to love.” Veiled in Dantesque mysticism, muffled in Shakespearian obscurity, such was,
      to her who understood and was expected to understand, the gist of all the poems which he
      wrote. The day would come, Anne saw it clearly, when some trifling quarrel, some trifling
      jealousy, some rebuff to his vanity, or some sense of more than usual vacuity, would get the
      better of Hamlin’s patience, and when he would say to Anne that he loved her and that her love
      was his life. She had gone over it all so often in fancy, with the bitter sarcasm of
      understanding that whole, to her so tragic, little comedy. But had she been a person more
      observant and penetrating than she was (for her long delusion about her cousin Richard plainly
      shows that she was neither), or had she been less engrossed in her own conception of events,
      Miss Brown might have noticed,
       as spring turned into summer, that certain slight changes
      were taking place in Hamlin. He had, without any intentional rupture, taken to seeing much
      less of Chough and Dennistoun; he scarcely ever visited his old master, Mrs Spencer, or any
      others of the school; he refused invitations to parties, or if he had accepted, found them too
      great a bore at the last moment; the only house, except that at Hammersmith, which he
      frequented, was Madame Elaguine’s. He used to attend all her spiritualistic séances, and alternate between finding spiritualism a vulgar fraud
      and a mystic possibility; he used to quarrel with Edmund Lewis, and at the same time to seek
      his company more than any other man’s. He would vacillate also between the most extreme
      opinions about his cousin Sacha. One day he would entertain Anne by the hour about her
      virtues, her talents, her persecution; the next he would be captiously fault‐finding, accusing
      Madame Elaguine of being a brainless little flirt, a mere ordinary Russian, who
       cared only for excitement and being perpetually en scène.
“What is the use of asking people to be intense when it is not their nature?” Anne would
      ask, not without bitterness in her own heart. “If you find a pleasant friend, be satisfied and
      thankful for your good luck.”
Be it as it may, Hamlin was restless, subject to strange ups and downs of humour, sometimes
      in a state of vague unaccountable cheerfulness, sometimes horribly depressed. To any one but
      Anne it would have occurred that there must be some novelty in his life. But Anne did not see;
      indeed, from a sort of instinct, she observed Hamlin as little as possible: she had loved him
      when she had not known him; the less she saw, except his gentle, chivalric, poetic, idealising
      surface, the better.
But one day—it might be a fortnight after the memorable walk home from Richmond’s
      lecture—Anne found among her letters one, evidently delivered by hand or dropped into the
      letterbox
      , the address upon which. puzzled her considerably. It was
      not merely that the handwriting was unknown to her, but that it was so utterly unlike any
      human handwriting that could be conceived; it was like a child’s elaborate copy of print, but
      executed with a precision, and at the same time a certain artistic chic, of which a child is incapable. Had she been in Italy, Anne would have
      expected to find within that envelope one of those marvellously written out and illuminated
      sonnets which certain needy individuals, counts and marquises fallen into bad circumstances
      and anxious to redeem their only bed from the pawnbroker’s, serve up at regular intervals to
      English and Americans, “the many illustrious qualities of whose mind and heart, as well known
      as their noble family,” are supposed to include munificence to beggars. To Anne’s astonishment
      the letter which she found actually was in Italian. But it was Italian of Stratford‐atte‐Bow,
      and her first impulse was to burst out laughing. But the
       next moment she reddened with surprise and indignation.
“MADONNA MIA,” began this epistle, which had evidently been concocted
      with a ‘Decameron’ and a Baedeker’s travelling phrase‐book, and which sounded like English
      written by a German waiter who should have taken to Spenser after the first dozen
      lessons,—“Inasmuch as it always is the duty of the honest to warn the unsuspecting, and the
      most honourable are always those who suspect least, your true friend and well‐wisher desires
      you may keep an eye upon the machinations of a base woman; and be on your guard against the
      friendship [underlined] of cousins.”
Anne turned the note round and round, and read and re‐read it, her heart beating as if she
      had received a slap in the face. “The friendship of cousins.” Her first thought
      was that this was an allusion to herself and Richard Brown; some one had understood what she
      had not, and was suspecting what was not true. But then her mind picked up that other
       mysterious phrase, “the machinations of a base woman.” The
      cousins were not herself and Dick, but Hamlin and Sacha Elaguine, and that was the base woman
      alluded to. It was as if a great light had shone in Anne’s face; she was dazzled, dazed. The
      friendship of two cousins! Was there, then, more than friendship between them? Did Hamlin love
      Sacha, or Sacha Hamlin? Anne gave a great sigh; but it was a sigh of relief,—the sigh of the
      drowning wretch who is dragged on shore—the sigh of the hunted fugitive who sees his pursuers
      turn back. The friendship of cousins? Why, then, she was saved, she was free! But her
      excitement lasted only a minute. Was she to believe an anonymous letter, evidently malicious,
      evidently intended to slander an innocent woman, to sow discord or to ruin her own happiness?
      It was evidently from an enemy of Madame Elaguine’s; it could not be from a friend of her own;
      for a friend would have spoken to her clearly and openly, or would have spared her what, in
      the eyes of the world,
       which regarded her as Hamlin’s affianced bride, must have
      been a horrible revelation. It was an infamous or ridiculous calumny. From whom did it come?
      Anne thought for a long time; she counted up her own enemies and Madame Elaguine’s. At one
      moment she suspected Edmund Lewis, at another Mrs Spencer; but she was too honest to credit
      any one of them with such a piece of treachery. Madame Elaguine’s mysterious enemies—yes, it
      must be they! thought Anne; it must be a new trick of theirs, a device for alienating her from
      her new friends. Anne’s heart sank. Why must such terrible temptations be put upon her?
Miss Brown meditated for some time upon what she ought to do. She felt indignant with the
      mysterious author of the letter; and she felt that, as it contained a slander, it was her duty
      to let those whom it accused know the whole matter. Should she show that paper to Hamlin? Once
      in her life, Anne gave way to a movement of cowardice. That letter,
       shown by her to Hamlin, would, she knew, bring the
      catastrophe. Hamlin would be furious and delighted; he would think she was jealous and
      unhappy; he would on the spot declare that he loved her, and ask her to be his wife. This
      consummation of her sacrifice, which, in the dull apathy of the last fortnight, she had almost
      prayed for, now terrified her. When it came, she was ready; but to hasten it—to bring it down
      untimely on herself—to do that, Anne had not the heart. After all, it concerned Madame
      Elaguine most, and she would doubtless have some clue to the writer of the letter, and
      consequently take the matter less to heart. Anne determined to show the letter to her. She
      thought she would go to her at once, or write; but a faint, faint, almost unconscious instinct
      of self‐preservation bade her wait awhile; wait till she should have an opportunity of seeing
      Madame Elaguine in the natural course of events.
Miss Brown had made up her mind that the mysterious letter had no sort of truth in it; yet
      despite this decision, which lay, cut and
       dry, on the surface of her consciousness, a hidden
      imperceptible movement was going on within her. She seemed suddenly to remember things which
      she had not at the time noticed, to see things which had not before existed, and must still
      have been there yesterday as well as to‐day. Things which had been meaningless acquired a
      meaning; things which had seemed without connection began to group themselves. A change had
      taken place of late in Hamlin; he had become solitary and morose, and more than usually up and
      down in spirits—he had seen only Sacha and her. How much had he seen of Sacha? Anne did not
      know, but she imagined a great deal. Then she remembered how he had taken to finding fault
      with the little woman, to running her down systematically to himself and to Anne. Could it be
      that he felt himself tempted to break his engagement? Anne knew Hamlin too well by this time
      to credit him with that. If such a thing should happen,—if, finding insensibly that
       Anne was not what he had imagined, disappointed with her
      coldness, hurt by her censoriousness, and attracted by a woman who was everything that she was
      not—Hamlin should ever come to feel for Sacha more than mere friendship, it was not in his
      nature to perceive his danger and to struggle; he would let himself go to sleep in the
      pleasantness of a new sensation, he would drift on vaguely, and start up in surprise.
A new love was for him the most poignant of temptations,—a new love in its still
      half‐unconscious, Platonic, vague condition; and he was not a man to resist such a temptation;
      indeed he had gone through life with the philosophy that a poet may dally with any emotion,
      however questionable, as long as he does not actually commit a dishonourable action. Oh no,
      Hamlin’s ups and downs could not be struggles or remorse; so Anne decided that it was all
      fancy, all calumny. And she determined to give the letter to Sacha on the first
      opportunity.
Madame Elaguine at last made up her mind that her little Helen ought to learn something; and
      with the impulsiveness of her nature, she determined that she, whom she had always kept under
      her own eyes, should go to school. Why there should be such a swing of the pendulum, and why
      Madame Elaguine should not rather hire a governess to teach the child in her own house, Miss
      Brown could not explain, except by the capriciousness, the tendency always to be in extremes,
      of Hamlin’s cousin. Anyhow, Sacha had determined that Helen must soon go to school, and she
      had written to Anne begging her, before the child went, to permit her to share for a week or
      two the lessons which Miss Brown was giving the little Choughs. “I know,” she wrote, “that my
      poor little child is not fit to be turned loose among other children yet; I know she is too
      ignorant, too sensitive, too much accustomed to life with her elders. To learn with Mr
      Chough’s children, to play with them, will take the keen edge off; and also, I know, my
       dearest Anne, that if anything can make this (I fear, alas!
      alas! to my shame) over‐sensitive and self‐willed little savage more human, more desirous of
      being good, and of raising herself, it will be your influence. I have often felt what it would
      have been for me to have had a friend like you, and I feel what it will be for my child.”
Anne was touched by this letter. Poor Madame Elaguine, although she did care too much for
      Baudelaire and Gautier, and did tell too many anecdotes about married women’s lovers and
      married men’s cocottes for Anne’s taste, was yet a good and
      brave little woman; and she must be helped, if one could help her. And Anne was doubly
      indignant about that anonymous letter she put in her pocket, and went to call on Hamlin’s
      cousin.
Madame Elaguine was in one of her unstrung moments. Anne found her lying on a sofa, a heap
      of books about her, reading none, fidgety and vacant. She brightened up for a moment on Miss
      Brown’s entry, and
       received her with a kind of rapturous gratitude, quite out
      of all proportion; but she speedily relapsed into her depressed condition. Anne thought it
      better not to introduce the business at once.
“I want to know,” she said, “why you are suddenly so anxious to send your little Helen to
      school, when you said, only a few days ago, that you could not bear even that a stranger
      should have any influence upon her.”
Madame Elaguine hesitated. “Oh, dear Anne,” she suddenly exclaimed, “I am a poor, weak,
      vacillating creature, always in excesses. You must have pity on me. I suppose it
      is just because I was so horribly selfish about my child that I have been crushed suddenly
      with the necessity of sacrificing my feelings completely. It comes home to me—and oh, you
      cannot think what it means to me!—that I am ruining my child, that she will turn out merely
      another myself—another wretched, weak, unhappy creature, with just morality enough to make her
      utterly
       miserable, and just common‐sense enough to make her feel her
      own silliness. It is a terrible thing for a mother to say; but it is true, and I must say it:
      I am not fit to bring up my own child—I am not worthy to do it.”
Anne looked at the Russian, who had raised herself on her sofa convulsively, and thatched
      and torn to pieces a flower which was lying on her, with a great look of pity.
“I am not bad!” cried Sacha—“I am not bad! I want to be good; but I can’t. Oh, and I can’t
      teach my child anything, not even the multiplication table,” and she suddenly burst out
      laughing.
Anne did not know whether to cry or to laugh.
“I quite understand your wishing that Helen should get the habit of work, and should learn
      something,” she said, in her business‐like way; “but I cannot see the advantage of sending her
      to school. She is far too nervous and delicate, and far too much accustomed to indulgence, to
      get anything but harm from a
       school. Were she a mere strong, sturdy, spoilt child, it
      would do her an immense deal of good; but a child, you admit it yourself, so morbidly and
      almost physically sensitive, would only be miserable at school, and probably be terrified by
      unaccustomed discipline and want of sympathy. Don’t you think it would be wiser to get Helen a
      thoroughly good governess, so that she could learn something, and yet be in your house?”
“I won’t have a governess; they are all good‐for‐nothings. I won’t have spies in the house!”
      exclaimed Madame Elaguine, vehemently.
“Nonsense!” said Anne; “how can you talk like that? You know that governesses are just as
      good as schoolmistresses; and for you and Helen such a plan would be in every way
      preferable.”
“I won’t have any one in the house to pry into my affairs!” repeated Sacha, hotly. “Helen
       must go to school.”
Anne felt angry with the little woman.
“Of course it is for you to choose,” she said; “but I confess I can’t see why you should not
      have a governess any more than other people.” She felt as if there were something wrong
      here.
“And do you forget what my life is?” cried Sacha; “do you forget that I am the daily, hourly
      victim of unseen enemies? Would you have me admit some one to my house, that she might play
      into their hands, or, at all events, pry into my misfortune?”
Anne had forgotten that. How unjust she was!
“True,” she said; “I think we might find a governess who, even under your circumstances,
      might be safely admitted into the house. But I can understand your unconquerable aversion to
      the idea, so we had better look out for a school, and, till one is found, I shall be delighted
      if you will send Helen to me. I fear I can’t do much for her, but at all events she will meet
      the Choughs, who are very good little girls.”
Madame Elaguine rose, and, to Anne’s immeasurable
       surprise, she flung herself on her neck, and began to
      sob.
“Oh Anne, dearest Anne,” she said, “you are so good to me—so good, so very good—and I don’t
      deserve it at all—indeed I know I don’t.”
“Nonsense; you are unwell and unstrung about Helen, and you are just making yourself
      miserable. Do try and be quiet, and reflect that there is nothing whatever to be miserable
      about.”
Somehow or other Miss Brown, for all her good‐nature, always had a harsh instinct whenever
      she saw Sacha in such a condition as this—an instinct that the Russian could prevent it—that
      such fits of tears and abjectness were mere self‐indulgence, and self‐indulgence which was
      utterly incompatible with Anne’s idea of self‐respect.
But Madame Elaguine could not be reined in. She fell back in an arm‐chair in an agony of
      hysterical sobbing, mixed with ghastly laughing.
“It is not nonsense; it is true—it is true; I don’t deserve it. I deserve that you should
      hate me. Oh Anne, you must hate me; but it is not my fault. I hate him! I have always hated
      him! I have told him so; but he won’t believe. Oh, indeed it is not my fault. But of course
      you hate me, you . . .” and she suddenly burst out laughing.
Anne was very white. She had heard and she had understood; but she had no right to have
      heard or to have understood.
Suddenly Sacha started up and looked strangely about her.
“What! you are here?” she asked, with a start as if of terror. “Oh, what have I been talking
      about? Oh, I am sure I have been talking nonsense!”
“Poor little woman!” said Anne; “yes, you have been talking nonsense; you are
      afraid of having a governess for Helen, lest—”
“Ah!” cried Madame Elaguine, with a sigh of relief. “Oh, you don’t know what it is to have
      such a fit. One feels one is talking lies,
       and yet that one must go on. I never had any such things
      before they began to persecute me. It is almost the worst part of my misfortune. Fancy seeing,
      feeling one’s self becoming day by day more abject, and being unable to stop it. Oh, I still
      feel so frightened! something dreadful must have happened while I had that fit just now. Do
      call for some tea, Anne, darling; I feel so shaken, as if something had happened.”
“You will feel all right when you have had some tea,” said Anne. “Tell me, have they, have
      those people been frightening you of late?”
Madame Elaguine nodded. “Only last night; you don’t know what happened. I didn’t intend
      telling you—look here—but it is that that has put me into such a state,” and opening the door
      of her bedroom, Sachs pointed to the wall opposite.
Over Madame Elaguine’s bed hung a painted portrait of little Helen; but where the face
      should have been was a dark spot.
“Good heavens! what have they done?” cried Anne.
“Oh, they have only cut out Mademoiselle Hélène’s face,” said the Swiss maid, who was
      sitting in the room, with a shrug. “For my part, I am accustomed to such tricks, and so, I
      should think, must be Madame also.”
Something cynical and insolent in the woman struck Anne very much.
“How horrible!” she said, leading Sacha back to the drawing‐room. “I can quite understand
      your being excited to‐day, and feeling anxious about Helen.”
“It is because of that,” said Sacha, with clenched teeth, “that I want to send Helen to
      school. She will be safer there than here. If things go on as now, I shall have to send Helen
      to a convent; I am no protection to her.”
“You must marry, and have a husband to take care of you,” said Anne, quietly.
Madame Elaguine turned scarlet. Was she
       afraid of having let out her secret? But to Anne’s surprise,
      instead of looking anxious, a sudden look of triumphant amusement passed over her face, a
      strange brazen look, and she burst out laughing—
“Ah yes, marry!—that would be a fine idea!—and whom, pray? Perhaps Lewis or Chough. True—I
      forgot—he has a wife! Ah no, a rolling stone like me must always be solitary.”
“You need not always be a rolling stone,” said Anne, gently. “But I must go—good‐bye, dear
      Madame Elaguine.”
At the door she met Hamlin. It seemed to her that he looked guilty, and coloured.
“I have been to see your cousin; she has had another horrid trick played to her. Go up to
      her, it will do her good to see you; she is very lonely, poor little woman.”
Hamlin was unnerved by the allusion to the persecution. He stood silent for a moment, with a
      long lingering look on Anne, like a man making a mental comparison.
“You are very good, Miss Brown,” he said, slowly; “there is no other woman in the world like
      you.”
“Sacha has been more tried than I,” answered Anne. And Hamlin went up and Miss Brown went
      out.
MISS BROWN did not hand over the anonymous letter either to Madame Elaguine or to
      Hamlin. She felt that she had now no longer a right to do so. Sacha had, in the vague pouring
      out of words of that fit which Anne had witnessed, let out her secret; but Anne had no right
      to use it or to act upon it. She could only watch and wait.
Wait!—but in what a different spirit! Wait, not for the hour of death, but for the moment of
      freedom, of complete freedom.
“What has happened to you?” asked Mrs Spencer, meeting her on her way back from Madame
      Elaguine’s. “Why, you look quite another being, Anne—as if some one had left you a
      fortune!”
“No one has left me anything,” said Anne. “I feel very happy, that’s all.”
“But where in all this wretched London have you been that you should feel happy?”
Anne laughed.
“I have been to see Madame Elaguine.”
Mrs Spencer frowned.
“Well, that wouldn’t be enough to make me feel happy, I confess. Was Walter
      Hamlin there? I believe it’s his safest address now, isn’t it?”
“Mr Hamlin was there,” answered Anne, sternly.
“Mark my words!” said Mrs Spencer that evening to her father and husband, and to one or two
      of those well‐thinking æsthetes de la vieille roche, whom
      Hamlin had basely deserted. “Mark my words! Anne Brown has got impatient with all this
      philandering of Walter’s about that precious Russian of his. There has been a grand scene, and
      Hamlin has come round to reason. I met her returning from that Elaguine woman’s to‐day, and
       she never looked so happy in her life. She said Hamlin had
      been there, and I know that she gave them both a bit of her mind. She’s a proud woman, Anne
      Brown, and could squash that little Russian vixen like that!”
“But, my dear Edith,” objected her father, seated among an admiring crowd in his dusty
      studio at Hampstead, among his ghastly Saviours on gilded grounds, and Nativities, in despite
      of perspective—“how de ye know that there’s ever been any philandering between ’em?”
“Oh papa, really now you are too provoking!”
“Oh, Mr Saunders, how do we know anything?” chorussed the two or three elderly poetesses and
      untidy Giottesque painters of the circle.
“P’raps ye don’t know anything, any of ye!”
Mrs Spencer sighed, as much as to say, “See what it is to be the long‐suffering daughter of
      the greatest genius in the world, and pity me!”
Cosmo Chough had been reading some of his ‘Triumph of Womanhood,’ lying on the hearth‐rug in
      the studio.
“Do you think he has proposed?” he asked, darting up, with beaming eyes.
“Proposed! I should think so, and been told not to play such tricks again.”
“Ah!” cried Chough, “thank heaven. I—I—” but he stopped.
“You shall send Anne your Ginevra in the Tomb, papa, as a wedding present.”
“Don’t be in too great a hurry,” said old Saunders; whereupon he was jeered at with all the
      respect due to so great an artist.
For the first time after so long, Anne felt happy. A load was off her mind. That Hamlin
      should love Sacha, and Sacha Hamlin, was the miracle which alone could release her, and
      releasing her, put an end at the same time to the horrible false position into which Hamlin’s
      self‐engagement to a woman so different from himself created for him also in the future. And
      now only did it strike Anne that perhaps
       she had no right towards Hamlin to pay off her debt of
      gratitude at the expense of what might be his future misery as well as hers. Had Hamlin been
      sufficiently infatuated to wish to marry a woman whom he did not really and solidly love,
      would it have been right on her part to let him have his way? All these doubts, which she had
      previously put behind her, as mere selfish sophistry to tempt her from her duty, now rushed
      home to her. But they came no longer to torment, but to add to the relief, the cessation of
      bondage. Hamlin would never, she said to herself, have been really happy with her as a wife;
      and now it happened that he had met the woman who, whatever her shortcomings, seemed to suit
      him. That Sacha Elaguine was an undisciplined, thoughtless, rather sensuous woman, loving
      excitement and art, and indifferent to abstract good and evil, Anne fully admitted; but were
      not these the very qualities which would make her appreciate what in Hamlin was original and
      charming, and blind
       her, for her happiness (and added Anne, convinced by sad
      failure of the futility of trying to change people’s nature) and for his, to his weak sides?
      And Sacha had just that exuberant passionateness, more of the temperament and the fancy than
      of the heart, which Hamlin required, and which she, Anne, so lamentably lacked. For Sacha also
      it would mean a new life: it would mean, for the poor, excitable little woman, always
      defrauded of affection and of an object of adoration, a reality in her life, something to
      love, to worship, to pet, to flatter—something to make her forget her miserable bedraggled
      childhood, her wretched married life, her persecution and her maladies. This it would mean to
      them; and to Anne it would mean . . . Ah! Anne did not dare to think what it would mean for
      her; she was not yet sure. She might be mistaken, she was still bound to doubt. And still,
      that great bliss, at which Anne was afraid to look, meant only what to other women would have
      been a poor gift: liberty
       to gain her bread, to feel and think for herself—a life’s
      solitude.
Days passed on; and Anne, instead of being, as she expected, disappointed, was confirmed by
      every little thing in her belief. On one pretext or other, Hamlin was perpetually at Madame
      Elaguine’s. The latest excuse for seeing her was to paint her portrait; so, for a number of
      days, Sacha came every morning to the house at Hammersmith, and spent a couple of hours at
      least closeted with Hamlin in the studio. Anne usually received her, and she frequently stayed
      to lunch; and Miss Brown could not help feeling indignant at the coolness with which Hamlin
      amused himself playing with two women: he was perpetually trailing after Sacha, he was
      perpetually, she felt persuaded, talking about life and love and himself in a way which was
      equivalent to making love to the little woman; and yet, he would still come and sit at Anne’s
      feet, and represent himself as the dejected and heartbroken creature whom only a strong and
      pure
       woman could help. Once, Miss Brown had considerable
      difficulty in restraining herself when, after a day spent with his cousin, he came in the
      evening to her, and began the usual talk about his soul being shrivelled up.
“I feel I am not worthy to live!” he exclaimed. “I have become too weak and selfish to enjoy
      the world; I feel that I am sinking into a bog of meanness and sensuality; and yet I cannot
      even become the mere beast that I ought—the mere beast that would be satisfied with the mud. I
      keep looking up, and longing for higher things which I cannot attain.”
“How very sad!” said Anne, icily; “what a pity you can’t make up your mind! it would save
      you much valuable time. But then, I suppose, it always comes in usefully for sonnets. That is
      the great advantage of being a poet.”
Hamlin was silent. He had—she felt sure, and she was indignant as if at an affront—imagined
      that he might tempt her into saying—“I will raise you,” while his poor, giddy,
       irresponsible cousin was being dragged further and further
      into a passion which she would never recover from—for she, at least, had a heart and he had
      none.
“You despise me!” cried Hamlin, after a minute.
“I thought your indecision between the bog and the stars rather contemptible, certainly,
      just now. But I now see that such conditions are as necessary to you as a poet as are your lay
      figures and studio properties to you as a painter. It was my ignorance.”
Hamlin fixed his eyes on the ground. He looked very weak and miserable, and like a man who
      feels that he has dishonoured himself in some way. But to Anne it was all merely a piece of
      acting—the climax of that long and nauseous comedy of self‐reproach and self‐sympathising, of
      pretending to hanker after evil and good, that was equally indifferent to him,—that comedy
      which had begun long ago in his letters to her at Coblenz, which she had watched with
      admiration, and love, and agony
       at first, and with contempt and disgust at last. And she
      was hardened towards him. She could have said to him—“Go and marry Sacha!” only that at this
      moment such a notion seemed an insult to his cousin, and that a horrible fear possessed her
      that he would seize upon that, and try and work her and her anger into this very patchwork of
      artificial and morbid sentiment over which he was for ever gloating. Once or twice, indeed, it
      did occur to Anne that perhaps this whole flirtation with Madame Elaguine had been got up by
      Hamlin for her, benefit; that he was playing with the heart of the foolish little woman (who
      did not realise that he was making her love him) merely to provoke Anne’s jealousy—to move her
      by this means, since he had failed by every other. But even if it had been thus begun, and
      Miss Brown shrank from believing that Hamlin would have been so deliberately base, it was
      clear that the comedy had become reality—that he cared for his cousin and she for him.
      Perhaps—perhaps—all this remorse was real
       after all. But Anne’s heart had got hardened against him:
      she could no longer, do what he liked, believe that there was anything genuine in him.
Meanwhile Hamlin’s perpetual attendance on Madame Elaguine had become apparent to every one;
      and even Mrs Spencer admitted to her father that Hamlin could not have proposed that day she
      had met Anne.
“That is to say—mind you, I daresay he actually did propose; but that wretched woman somehow
      contrived to talk him over again. I believe she’s capable of everything!”
“Well, my dear,” said her father, “it goes a little against your theory that Miss Brown
      looks just as happy as possible.”
“Because she’s too honourable to believe!” exclaimed Mrs Spencer; and forgetting the many
      acrimonious remarks in which she had indulged against Miss Brown, and the many times she had
      sighed at Walter Hamlin taking up with a “mere soulless Italian” instead of with this or the
      other Sappho or Properzia dei Rossi
       of her circle, she added—“I always knew that Anne was one
      of the noblest women in the world; and the nobler women are, the less will they believe in the
      baseness of men. For my part, I think love and marriage are the greatest curses of a woman’s
      life.”
In which sentiment poor Mr Spencer modestly acquiesced.
“I shall have to warn her some day, if no one else has the courage to do so,” she said. Of
      course no one else did have the courage. Edmund Lewis became every day more and more offensive
      in manner to Miss Brown; he hated her, and he enjoyed seeing her what he considered
      ousted.
Mrs Macgregor, although she went on abusing Madame Elaguine for being the Sacha of other
      days, lived too much in her bedroom, saw too little of what was going on even in the house, to
      guess at anything. Mary and Marjory Leigh looked on in wonder and indignation; but Anne’s calm
      and cheerful manner forbade their saying anything. Did
       not Anne know better than any one how Hamlin felt towards
      her? and if Anne was satisfied, must it not all be a delusion?
“Besides, Hamlin is too honourable,” said Mary, forgetting about the letter to Harry
      Collett; “and how could a poet, an artist, prefer an odious, rowdy, hysterical creature like
      Madame Elaguine to such a being as Anne Brown?” The mere thought seemed a profanation.
“I don’t think Hamlin is a bit noble,” said Marjory, sternly; “and such a little wretch is
      just likely to pamper his vanity—and Anne is too honest to do that.”
“Every man has a nobler and a baser side,” said Harry Collett, mercifully. “Madame Elaguine
      (though I think it very uncharitable to hate her because she is a little rowdy, and I’m sure
      she’s quite innocent) may flatter Hamlin’s worse part. But the nobler will always have its
      way, and with it Miss Brown. Walter is weak, but he can see the difference between an inferior
      woman and a superior one. Besides, after all, she is his cousin, and I see
       no reason to go tittle‐tattling because two cousins are
      friends.”
“That’s the way Harry pays off Hamlin for writing that beastly letter about me!” said
      Marjory to her sister, when Mr Collett was gone. “How I do hate evangelical charity! how I do
      wish Harry had just a little of the bad in him!”
Mary laughed, and catching hold of Marjory, kissed her.
“What do you mean?” cried Marjory, indignantly breaking loose.
“I mean, Marjory dear, that though you imagine the contrary, you are very, very glad that
      Harry is just what he is.”
“Well, perhaps I am. But still, oh, I do hate . . .”
And thus the Leighs, being very happy themselves, forgot Anne Brown’s supposed grievances,
      even as the best of us, being happy, will forget the wrongs of others.
But there was one person who could not forget what seemed to him the most frightful
       sacrilege in the world; and that person was Mr Cosmo
      Chough. He considered himself as the assistant high priest of the divinity called Anne Brown,
      and he believed that it was his duty to bring back the high priest in person, namely Hamlin,
      to the worship from which the powers of evil had momentarily seduced him. But he thought it
      more simple to apply to the offended goddess than to her recalcitrant priest, who, to tell the
      truth, had treated his vague remarks with considerable scorn. Accordingly, one day (June had
      come round now) Miss Brown was informed that Mr Cosmo Chough desired to see her.
“How ao you do, Mr Chough?” said Anne, stretching out her hand to the little man, who came
      in with even more than usually brushed coat and hat, and more than usually blacked boots, his
      lips squeezed into a long, cat‐like grimace of solemnity, his brows knit gloomily, and walking
      on the tips of his toes like an operatic conspirator. Mr Chough sat down and sighed.
“Will you have some tea?” asked Miss Brown, with her hand on the bell.
The poet of womanhood darted up, laid one hand lightly on Anne’s arm, and opening and
      straightening out the other with an eloquent gesture, said—
“Excuse me. I would rather have no tea. I want your attention—your best
      attention—seriously and at once.”
Anne could not help smiling.
“You can have both some tea and my best, my very best attention,” she said.
Mr Chough sighed, and waited gloomily until tea had been brought, absolutely refusing to
      open his lips.
“Have you brought something to read to me?” asked Anne, thinking it might be some new bit of
      the ‘Triumph of Womanhood,’ which Cosmo Chough most innocently read to all the ladies of his
      acquaintance, only Anne having the courage to say every now and then, “I think that had better
      be omitted, Mr Chough. I think people will give it
       a bad meaning which perhaps you don’t intend.”
“I have nothing to read,” answered Chough, solemnly. “I have come to ask your advice about a
      matter more important than any literary one.”
“You shall have it if I can give any. Go on, Mr Chough.”
“Well, then,” began Cosmo, stooping forward on his chair and frowning, “let me premise that
      I have two friends whom I greatly value. I am not at liberty to mention their names; but I
      will call one the Duke, and the other la Marquise.”
“Oh!” cried Anne, laughing, “I fear I can’t give you any advice about such exalted people as
      that. I am a woman of the people, and have never known a duke in my life.”
“One moment’s patience, dear Miss Brown. This Duke—who lives—well, let us say he has a
      magnificent hôtel entre cour et jardin in Paris, has been
      affianced ever since his childhood to the Marquise, who is the most beautiful
       and divine woman in the world, as he, indeed, is the most
      accomplished gentleman, besides being my dearest friend; and they have been looking forward to
      a union which will make their happiness, and that of their friends, perfect. Do you follow
      that? But now—” and Cosmo Chough, stretching out one long thin leg, so as to display his small
      foot and the martial wrinkles of his boot, and propping his elbow on his other knee—“now,
      mark. There comes into our perfect duet a discordant voice. A certain lady, whom I will
      designate as the Queen of Night”—and he made his cat’s grimace, and pausing, looked mournfully
      at Miss Brown, who sat quietly by, bending over a piece of embroidery which she was doing from
      a design by Hamlin.
“Well!”
“Well, this lady, by some occult power of which I cannot judge, gains possession of the
      fancy of the Duke—not of his heart,—he still continuing to love the Marquise coralment, as the trouvères
      say,—and in short leads him,
       without however, as I said, in the least diminishing his
      passionate love for the Marquise, into acts, or at least appearances, which, to the mind of
      the vulgar are incompatible with such love. What do you say to that?”
Little by little Miss Brown had guessed what Chough was hiding beneath this grotesque piece
      of romancing.
“I say that the vulgar are probably right; and that the Marquise, for all the coral love of the Duke, had better throw him over, if she has a
      grain of self‐respect. Will you have another cup, Mr Chough?”
Anne spoke coldly and indifferently; and Chough, who, despite his vaunted knowledge of the
      human heart, was the most obtuse of good‐hearted little people, actually prided himself upon
      having put his case so delicately, that Miss Brown could not even guess as yet that she was
      alluded to.
“But the Duke would die were he to lose her! The Queen of Night, who is a wicked
       fairy—une méchante fée—une fernme
       serpent
       —une mélusine, enfin tout ce qu’il
       vous plaira” (Chough always liked to show off his French)—“has fascinated only his
      fancy, not his heart. It would be most unfair if he were to lose the Marquise. Well, to
      proceed; the remedy would easily be found. La Marquise, like all passionately loving women, is
      a little cold and proud—tant soit peu hautaine et
      glaciale—need only thaw towards the Duke. She need only say or make a friend tell
      him, that she adores him and that he is her sole happiness—and see! the Queen of Night’s
      spells are forthwith broken by the power of true love—the Eternal Womanhood reasserts its
      right, and all is happy again. But the mischief is, that there is no means of bringing this
      home to the lady. Lately, indeed, a trusty and respectful friend, an Italian—a poet of some
      small distinction, I may add—ventured so far as to acquaint her of the public rumour
      concerning—I mean concerning the Duke and the Queen of Night—in an anonymous letter . . .”
Miss Brown suddenly sat bolt‐upright, and fixing her eyes on Chough, said—
“You don’t mean to say that you—you actually concocted that ridiculous missive?”
“Ridiculous missive! What ridiculous missive?” asked Cosmo Chough, striking an attitude.
“Well, I ought rather to say that most ungentlemanly anonymous letter, written in Italian
      which would make a cat laugh.”
“Ungentlemanly! ungentlemanly!” howled Chough; but in reality what he was thinking of was
      Miss Brown’s stricture upon the Italian.
“Oh, Miss Brown!” he cried, after a minute, “and it is possible that you should so far have
      misunderstood the friend who respects you most in the whole world, as to have supposed that
      that letter had any evil intention? Is it possible that you, who have of all people in the
      world been kindest to me, who have been as a mother to my children—that you should have such
      an opinion of me?”
Poor Cosmo had let go all his affectation;
       he wrung his hands in real distress, and he actually seemed
      to be crying.
“Oh fool, fool that I was, trying to do good, and merely making myself seem an odious
      ungrateful wretch!”
His sorrow was so genuine that Miss Brown felt quite sorry for him.
“Come, come, dear Mr Chough,” she said, “don’t distress yourself. I think you did a rather
      improper thing, but I am quite persuaded that you merely wished to do good.”
And she stretched out her hand.
Chough struck his head with his fist.
“Ah, you are good—you are too good—dear, dear Miss Brown! but I shall never
       recover from it—never. To think I only wished to do good—and you think me a
      slanderer!”
“Oh no,” said Anne, quietly, “I don’t think it for a moment. I know that all that letter
      contained was true, except that you were unjust to one of the parties; for I am sure Madame
      Elaguine is not at all base, and has no conception of what she is drifting into.”
Chough gaped in astonishment.
“You believe it to be true, and yet . . .”
“How can I help believing by this time what every creature can see, and what every creature,
      except themselves perhaps, must and does see as clear as the sun at noon?”
Anne spoke very composedly.
“But if that is the case—if you know—why then, how is it that you don’t—well, that you don’t
      put a stop to it?”
“One can’t put a stop to what has already taken place.”
“Oh, but you can—you can—and it was in hopes of your doing it that I wrote that letter. It
      is to entreat you to do it that I have come now, dear, dear Miss Brown, to supplicate, to
      implore you . . .”
“To do what?” There was a freezing indifference in her voice.
“To do what? Why, to do everything and anything! Dearest Miss Brown, I know, I understand
      fully, that Hamlin has acted unworthily towards you. I know, I admit, that
       to a woman like you—all passion, all nobility—Hamlin’s
      behaviour must be odious. But would it not be worthy of you to reflect that Hamlin is a poet,
      and acting merely as a poet must act? A poet is a double‐natured creature, a baser and a
      nobler nature, and his whole life consists merely in receiving as many and various impressions
      as both his natures can receive. A poet must know the stars, and know the mud beneath his
      feet; he must drink the milk and the absinthe of life,—he must love purely and impurely, with
      his heart, with his fancy, and with his senses—ah, you frown!—well, but such the poet is, such
      is Hamlin. His soul loves and adores you; what if, at the same time, his baser nature, the
      satyr in the god, be caught elsewhere? He loves you none the less; yes, he loves you even at
      the moment . . .”
“I think this all rather disgusting, don’t you, Mr Chough?” said Anne, sternly.
“Nay, have patience—for the sake of Hamlin, for the sake of your own noble goodness
      ! He loves you: and it requires but a look, a word, a
      message, to make him forget that other love, to make it evaporate like opium‐fumes. Oh say
      this word—say it—and blow that ugly cloud of impure love from off the fair resplendent face of
      his devotion to you! Write to him—speak to him. Empower me, oh dearest lady, to tell him that
      you love him, and that this wretched fancy of his is making you miserable!”
“It is not,” answered Anne, harshly; “it is not doing anything of the sort, and it is no
      more a fancy than his love for me. As to Madame Elaguine, she is in every way fit to be his
      wife.”
“His wife!” screamed Chough, and looked as if he would faint; “and you would let your
      resentment go thus far—you would let the nettles choke the roses, the impure passion choke the
      pure one, you would sacrifice him and yourself—you would let him . . .”
“I would let him marry his cousin. There is no impurity about it, so please don’t revert to
      that, Mr Chough. She is just the woman
       who might make him happy; the inclination is perfectly
      natural and proper.”
Chough started up. “Oh, you saint! you noble heroic woman!” he cried, kissing Anne’s dress
      enthusiastically.
“What are you doing, Mr Chough?” she asked angrily.
“I am kissing the holiest thing I shall ever touch,” answered the little man solemnly. “Yes!
      you are a saint, an Alkertis, an Iphigenia! But we will not let the monstrous self‐sacrifice
      take place! No, by heaven! never, never! You shall not give up your happiness; I will speak to
      Hamlin. I will tell him all, all—that you love him . . .”
“I do not love Hamlin,” said Anne sternly, pronouncing every word clearly and slowly.
“You do not love Hamlin!—you do not want—”
Poor little Chough was so utterly dumfounded that he had not the breath to finish his
      sentence.
“You have obliged me to say what I never
       intended to say to any one,” said Anne. “No; I do not love
      Hamlin; and if he marry his cousin, I shall be happier than I thought I ever could be.”
“You love another!” whispered Chough, his eyebrows and whiskers standing on end.
“Neither him nor any one else.”
“Then why—why have you not told him so? Why make the sacrifice of your inclinations—because,
      marrying him, you would be—why?”
“Mr Hamlin has done everything for me. I was a penniless, ignorant servant. He had me
      taught, he gave me his money, he gave me more kindness and trustfulness and generosity than
      any man ever gave any woman I think, and I must pay my debt. If he wants me, he shall have me.
      If not, so much the better for me.”
There was a silence. Anne took up her piece of work; Chough sat rapping gently on the table
      with his finger‐tips, looking wonderingly at her.
At last Miss Brown spoke.
“You have got my secret out of me, Mr Chough. I don’t believe much in you poets; and I think
      you are a giddy, often a foolish man. But I think you are a gentleman at heart, and a good
      man; and as such, I trust you never to let out, either by speech or hint or look, positively
      or negatively, a word of what I have told you. If Mr Hamlin marry his cousin, so much the
      better; if he marry me, so much the worse. But what must be, must be. And come what may, I
      depend upon you, as the only friend upon whom I can rely, to forget all that I have told you
      to‐day. Will you promise?”
Miss Brown looked very solemn; and Chough was overcome by an almost religious awe.
“I promise never to reveal,” he said quietly, “but you must not ask me to forget; I have
      neither the power nor the right to forget the best thing I have known in my life. Goodbye,
      Miss Brown, and God bless you!”
And Anne, who believed only in right and wrong, felt really the better and stronger for the
      blessing of the preposterous little poet of Messalina and Lucrezia Borgia, who declared
      himself to be an atheist when he did not declare himself to be a Catholic mystic.
SOME time after this conversation with Cosmo Chough, a circumstance took place
      which caused great momentary excitement, and considerably unsettled Miss Brown’s mind. The
      summer had come with a sudden rush; and Hamlin had had the notion of taking his aunt and Miss
      Brown, and two or three friends, to spend a week at Wotton. Among these friends was Madame
      Elaguine. That Hamlin should care to take his cousin to the house where she had played so
      lamentable a part in her childhood; that Sacha should endure to confront those invisible
      ghosts of her uncle, her cousins, her own former self, of all the shameful past, which haunted
      that house, was quite incomprehensible
       to Anne. But day by day she was forced to recognise that
      she was surrounded by incomprehensible ways of feeling and thinking, that she was, in a way,
      like a person solitary among mankind from deafness or blindness, from incapacity to put
      herself in their place; and recognising this, she recognised also, with her unflinching
      justice, that she had no right to hastily condemn the things which she could not understand.
      So when Madame Elaguine, on the evening of her arrival at Wotton, insisted on wandering all
      over the once familiar house, and openly said that she felt a pleasure, the bitter pleasure of
      self‐inflicted penance, in confronting the past, in humiliating her present self by the
      company of her former self, Anne merely said to herself that she could not conceive a woman
      feeling like that—but that, nevertheless, this theatrical and hysterical excitement might,
      after all, lead to as good a result as her own silent and painful solitary
      self‐absorption.
“She is a brazen creature!” Aunt Claudia had cried, when she heard that Sacha was going to
      Wotton; “corrupt like her father, and fantastic like her mother. She must get Mrs Spencer or
      some one else to chaperon her in that house, if indeed she wants any one. I shall stay behind.
      As to you, Annie, you are at liberty to go or not go, of course.”
“I shall go, Aunt Claudia,” Anne had answered resolutely, “because I don’t see that I have a
      right to imply by my absence that I disapprove of Madame Elaguine’s going to Wotton. I neither
      approve nor disapprove; and I think that, however little we may sympathise with her notions of
      self‐humiliation, we must give her the benefit of supposing that she is honest in them.”
So Anne had gone.
The self‐humiliation of Madame Elaguine, and the hours she had spent in her room—she had
      asked for the room which had been hers as a child—crying over the past, did not prevent her
      being in excessively high spirits the
       evening following their arrival and the successive one. It
      would seem as if the painful associations in which she had steeped herself had produced a
      reaction in her whole nature. She was childishly, almost uproariously gay, played with little
      Helen the greater part of the afternoon, and after dinner treated the company—that is to say,
      Anne, Mrs Spencer, Lewis, and Hamlin—to a perfect concert of all manner of wild gipsy songs,
      Spanish and Russian, sung with a fury which amounted almost to genius; and followed these up
      with little French songs, old and new, picked up heaven knows where—from operettes, from
      peasants, from books—the words of which and the astonishing gaminerie with which they were delivered, amused Lewis to fits of laughing, threw
      Chough into enthusiasm, annoyed Hamlin a little, puzzled poor Mrs Spencer, and made Anne
      reflect, as charitably as she could, upon the different standards of propriety which seemed to
      exist for Englishwomen and for Russians.
Madame Elaguine’s songs made Anne feel quite uncomfortable and angry; but she said nothing,
      seeing Mrs Spencer, who could tolerate any amount of impropriety as long as it was medieval
      and poetic, was evidently putting down this French levity as a mark of the Russian woman’s
      depravity; and she felt somehow, that though she was annoyed herself, and annoyed with good
      cause, she must not back up Mrs Spencer’s prejudiced indignation.
Cousin Sacha seemed to take a pleasure in vexing Hamlin, in shocking Anne, in making Mrs
      Spencer think her a wicked creature; she sang on, in her devil‐may‐care, street‐boy way, with
      a malicious, childish impudence in her face; then suddenly, when she saw Hamlin get positively
      black at what he considered her bad taste—suddenly dropped from her leste French couplets into a strange, wild, Spanish gipsy song, sad and despairing
      beyond saying.
She looked very fascinating, as she sat near the window, resting her guitar on her knee,
       her tiny feet and embroidered stockings very visible
      beneath the lace flounces and frills of her thistle‐down dress; her deep, Russian blue eyes
      looking, as it seemed, rather into the past than the present, her whole slight, even
      emaciated, body and face tense with a sort of hysterical emotion.
Suddenly she threw the guitar on the sofa.
“Bah!” she cried, “what is the use of singing sad things when one is sad? and what is the
      use of pretending to be merry, and shocking people with polissoneries when one feels as old and dismal as at ninety? I hate music.”
And she walked through the French window on to the wide terrace which surrounded one side of
      the house and overlooked the lawn.
“The only good thing,” she said, “in this world is tobacco‐smoke. If,” turning with affected
      deference and timidity to Mrs Spencer, who considered a woman who smoked as little short of an
      adventuress, “you have no objection, these gentlemen and I will have a smoke.”
“Oh, pray don’t mind me,” snorted Mrs Spencer, stalking back into the drawing‐room, and
      sitting down near the window.
The three men immediately produced cigars and cigarettes and matches.
“No, thank you, Walter,” said Madame Elaguine; “your cigarettes are too weak for me—too
      ladylike, like their owner, for a badly brought up woman. I must make mine myself.” And she
      went into her bedroom, the last room opening out to the terrace, to fetch her box of tobacco
      and her cigarette‐papers.
In a minute she returned, whistling, in a curious bird‐like whistle, below her breath, and
      rolling a cigarette in her fingers. Some of the party were seated, some standing. Madame
      Elaguine came to where Miss Brown was seated, looking into the twilight park.
“Dear Annie,” she murmured, putting her arm round Miss Brown’s neck, in her childish way,
      and which yet always affected Anne as might the caress of a lamia’s clammy scales.
“I fear,” she said, putting her face close to Anne, and lowering her voice to a whisper,
      “that you must have thought me horribly vulgar and undignified and indecent just now. I don’t
      know why I sang all those nasty songs; I suppose it was to vex Walter. I don’t like them
      myself. But sometimes a sort of horrible desire, a kind of demon inside me, makes me wish to
      do something which I know is disgusting; I feel as if I could be the lowest of women, just
      from perversity. Ah, it is sickening.”
Anne did not answer.
“Where did you learn those wonderful little Burgundian couplets, Sacha?” asked Lewis, in his
      sultan‐like familiar way. He had a trick of calling her Sacha every now and then, as he had
      tried, but failed, to call Miss Brown Annie.
“I don’t know. I ought not to have learned them at all; and I ought not to have sung them
      before a man like you, who notices all the nastiness there is in anything, and a great
       deal more besides,” answered Madame Elaguine, coldly.
“What a Southern evening!” exclaimed Cosmo Chough, looking up at the blue evening sky,
      singularly pure and blue and high, twinkling with stars, and against which the distant trees
      stood out clear like the sidescenes of a theatre. “It is sad that our cigars should have to do
      for fireflies,—to be the only thing imitating that,” and he pointed at the sky.
“A lit cigar is the only imitation of the stars which people like ourselves can attempt,”
      said the Russian. “It’s so in everything—our poetry, our passions—nothing but cigar‐lights for
      stars; don’t you think so, Annie?”
“What’s that?” asked Chough, suddenly.
They looked up at his startled voice.
“What’s what?” asked Madame Elaguine, quietly. “Have you seen the ghost of Imperia of Rome,
      Mr Chough?”
“What the deuce is that?” exclaimed Lewis. In the midst of the general blue
       dusk, one of the cedars on the lawn, and a screen of trees
      beyond, had suddenly burst into sight, enveloped in a bright light, which made the grass all
      round burn out a vivid yellowish‐green against the darkness.
Anne turned round quickly and looked behind her.
“The house is on fire!” she cried. “Madame Elaguine’s room!” And before the others could
      understand, she had rushed towards the other end of the terrace.
The light, which had suddenly illumined the piece of lawn, the trees opposite, did issue, a
      brilliant broad sheet like that of large chandelier, from out of the open window of Sacha’s
      room.
“Good heavens!” cried Hamlin, “you must have set the curtains on fire with the match of your
      cigarette!”
“No, no,” cried Madame Elaguine, “I lit my cigarette here outside; it must be . . .” and she
      rushed wildly after Anne into her bedroom.
An extraordinary spectacle met Miss Brown first, and the rest of the party an instant or two
      later.
The large old‐fashioned bed of Cousin Sacha, which stood in the centre of the room, was
      burning, blazing like a Christmas pudding, its whole top, coverlet and pillows, turned into a
      roaring mass of bluish flame, whence arose an acrid stifling smell.
“They have done it! they have done it!” shrieked Madame Elaguine, throwing herself into
      Hamlin’s arms. “They want to kill me! they have always said so!”
But before he had had time to answer, she had rushed off into a neighbouring room, and, with
      a presence of mind most unexpected in her, returned with a heap of woollen blankets which she
      had dragged off a bed.
“Pour the water on this!” she cried to Anne, who, with her strong arms, had immediately
      dashed the contents of a bath on to the flames. “Soak this! it is useless throwing water on
      the flames;” and taking the soaking
       blankets, the little woman threw them dexterously on to the
      blazing bed, among the hissing of the smoke and fire.
In a minute every one had brought blankets, cushions, water; the servants had run up; and in
      about five minutes the flames were extinguished.
The damages were very trifling compared with the appearance of danger. The fire had not
      spread beyond the surface of the bed, and consumed only the upper layer of bedding. But the
      sight of that expanse of waving blue flame had been frightful, and it seemed impossible to
      realise that no harm had been done.
“How has it happened?”—“How have they done it?”—“Send to the police station.”—“Scour the
      park!”—every one was talking at the same time.
“I’ll go down into the park and have a good hunt,” said Hamlin, taking down one of the guns
      which hung in the hall; “they can’t have got far yet.”
“I don’t think you’ll catch them,” answered Lewis, in his drawling ironical way.
“We’re not in Russia, Mr Lewis,” rejoined Mrs Spencer, bridling up; “here any
      one can be caught; it’s not an incompetent police as abroad.”
“Some things can’t be caught,” said Lewis, with an odd wise smile.
While they were standing discussing in the hall, they were startled by a sudden thump on the
      floor. Madame Elaguine, who had hitherto been singularly calm and energetic, had fallen in a
      half‐fainting condition, like a column on to the ground. She was carried in to a couch in the
      drawing‐room, and Anne called the Swiss maid, who came, with that sort of insolent
      indifference to the condition of her mistress, which had struck Miss Brown on more than one
      similar occasion. Madame Elaguine was in a state of hysterical panic—she wept, and laughed,
      and talked, and moaned; but she absolutely refused to be put to bed, and insisted with great
      violence that
       some of the company should remain about her. She kept
      Hamlin seated by the side of the sofa, his hand in hers, until the arrival of the police, and
      of neighbours who had heard of the burning bed, obliged him and the men to leave her. As soon
      as only Mrs Spencer and Anne Brown remained, she became more calm, and merely lamented over
      her fate, and over the probability that some day her enemies would really succeed in killing
      either her or her child.
A curious coincidence occurred, which remained impressed in Anne’s mind. While the rest of
      the party, including Mrs Spencer, were examining the house in company with the policemen, Miss
      Brown, who was seated near Madame Elaguine’s sofa—a sense of unreality, as of being at the
      play, filling her whole nature after that terrible sight of the blazing bed—mechanically
      opened a book which was lying on the table at her elbow. It was a child’s story which she had
      bought on a railway bookstall and given to little Helen Elaguine
       to keep her quiet during the journey to Wotton.
      Mechanically her eye ran along the page; but suddenly it stopped, as she read the following
      sentence, printed in rather larger type than the rest—
“And they never forgot, as long as they lived, that terrible burning bed.”
For a moment the words echoed through Anne’s mind as merely so much sound; but, as is the
      case when we hear a name which awakens associations which we cannot at first define to
      ourselves, she was conscious at the same time of an effort to adjust her faculties, to seize a
      meaning which was there, but which she could not at once grasp.
“And they never forgot, as long as they lived, that terrible burning bed.”
Anne kept on repeating those words to herself. They made her restless. She went to the
      window, and looked out into the night. The vision of that broad sheet of white light on the
      terrace and bushes, of that expanse of waving blue flamelets, rose up in her mind.
“That terrible burning bed.” She saw the printed page again. Then, as to a central bubble,
      other ideas which bubbled up slowly began to gravitate. Madame Elaguine’s perfect, and, in a
      woman so excitable, unaccountable presence of mind until all chance of further mischief had
      been over; the blankets which she had immediately dragged out of the next room, as a fireman
      might have dragged them; the rapid instruction, as of a person accustomed to such things, to
      wet the blankets instead of pouring water on the flames, as all the others had done; the
      insolent, indifferent look of the maid; the going into her room to fetch the cigarette‐papers
      only a minute or two before the conflagration, and when it would seem that whoever had set the
      bed aflame must have been making the necessary preparations. Then also, the fire had been so
      carefully limited to the bed, as if no real damage had been meant. No; that was merely
      consistent with the usual policy of Madame Elaguine’s mysterious enemies, who wished to
       frighten, but not to kill her. But another thought arose.
      Madame Elaguine possessed a good deal of valuable old lace, indeed more than her fortune at
      all warranted. Old lace was her hobby and her pride; she had always a lot on her dress, on her
      night‐gown, on everything. Some of the very finest that she possessed existed in large
      quantity as the trimming of a white satin dressing‐gown, which, towards the evening, was
      always put on her bed. Anne had noticed it this very evening, when Madame Elaguine had called
      her into her bedroom to ask her advice, as, with a spoilt child’s coquetry, she often did,
      about some flowers which she was putting in her hair for dinner. For some reason the maid had
      already arranged the room for the night, and, as usual, the white satin dressing‐gown trimmed
      with lace had been lying on the bed. Anne had made a note of the fact, because she had thought
      at the moment how absurd it was of the Russian to put such valuable lace upon a garment which
      was perpetually knocking
       about, and in which, as it seemed to Miss Brown, she would
      scarcely be seen except by her own servant. Now, while extinguishing the flames, one of Anne’s
      first thoughts had somehow been the white satin dressing‐gown. What a pity that all that lace
      should have been consumed! What an annoyance to Cousin Sacha! But, to her surprise and relief,
      she had seen the dressing‐gown, a mass of satin and lace, hanging in perfect safety on a peg
      at the furthest end of the room—the dressing‐gown which, an hour before, had already lain in
      readiness on the bed.
All these ideas moved confusedly through Miss Brown’s brain. Was it a mere ordinary mental
      delusion, one of those impressions which physiologists explain by the imperfect momentary
      double action of the two brain‐lobes; or was it a recollection of a suspicion which had long
      existed in her mind, but unconsciously, not daring to come to the surface? Anyhow, it seemed
      to Anne, as she stood by the open window looking into the night, and listening
       to Sacha’s faint moanings, as if she had gone through that
      or something similar before—as if it were not the first time that she was invaded by the
      thought that all this persecution by invisible and uncatchable enemies was a deception
      practised by Madame Elaguine herself, a kind of artificial excitement and interest got up for
      the benefit of her friends, for the benefit of her own morbid and theatrical temper? It was
      difficult for a woman, simple, sincere, completely all of a piece, like Anne Brown, to
      conceive such a possibility, and still more difficult for her not to revolt from its
      contemplation as from an act of disloyalty. But, on the other hand, Anne, just in proportion
      to her slowness of mental perception, had not the power, which so many of us possess, of
      denying the evidence of her reason for the sake of her feelings. So the words in the book,
      which seemed as if they contained the suggestion of the whole performance (if performance it
      was); the fact of the dressing‐gown having been out of reach of all danger; the manner of
      Madame
       Elaguine and of her maid on this and previous
      occasions,—haunted Anne, and united with the sudden recollection of what she had read in one
      of Marjory Leigh’s scientific books about the connection between hysteria and monomania, about
      the strange passion for deceit, for hoax, for theatricality, sometimes observable in
      hysterical women. And then she remembered the face and voice of Edmund Lewis, his ironical
      remark about the impossibility of finding the culprits, his indifference and amused
      superiority. Could he too have guessed?—and, it suddenly struck her, could Hamlin have had the
      same thought? No, she felt sure Hamlin had not.
THE incident of the burning bed left the inmates of Wotton Hall in a state of
      excitement which outlasted their stay in the country. All attempts to find the culprits had
      been useless; and Madame Elaguine had begged Hamlin not to permit any regular judicial
      inquiry, lest the story of her persecution, about which she affected to be excessively
      jealous, should become public property. Hamlin, who hated vulgar publicity, easily consented.
      But the mysterious story was now known to all the guests at Wotton, and soon became known to
      the whole pre‐Raphaelite set which centred round the house at Hammersmith, with the result of
      turning Madame Elaguine, in the eyes of Mrs Spencer and her friends, from
       something not much better than an adventuress, into
      something uncommonly like a heroine and a martyr; for it seemed as if these good folk, whose
      life was the most humdrum prose and whose ideal was the most far‐fetched poetry, felt absolute
      gratitude towards the remarkable individual who supplied them with a real mystery, a real
      persecution by unknown enemies, a real romance. So when Sacha, on her return to town, began to
      suffer or to think that she suffered from nervous prostration due to this terrible shock, and
      to lie even more than usual on sofas in even more than usually picturesque dressing‐gowns, she
      found herself surrounded by a crowd of sympathising and admiring artists, writers, and
      critics, to whom she confided, one by one, and in slightly different versions, the details of
      her strange history.
The only person who seemed displeased was Hamlin; and the only person who seemed cold was
      Miss Brown. Hamlin always required to absorb the whole attention of any person to whom he took
      a liking; to see his cousin fenced
       round with idiots, as he described it, was almost a
      physical annoyance to him; he was cross, captious, bitter, and gruff; and the more he showed
      his temper the more pleasure Madame Elaguine took in provoking him. As usual, when out of
      sorts with the world, and especially when he felt himself neglected, Hamlin began once more to
      pay attentions to Miss Brown, to bemoan his own baseness and weakness, to throw himself on her
      compassion, to insinuate that in her lay his only hope.
This sort of talk, with his beautiful dreamy eyes fixed adoringly upon her, his slow quiet
      voice sounding like that of a votary before an altar, had long become for Anne a mere
      additional bitterness; a bitterness of comprehension proportionate to the long delusion which
      had made her see in this sort of behaviour the dissatisfaction of a noble nature, the
      yearnings of real love. She was accustomed to it; and would have merely smiled the bitter
      smile which had become part of her nature. But now, every lover‐like look or word from Hamlin
       inspired Anne with positive terror; it seemed as if he had
      let her fancy that he loved his cousin—that he had let her dream of release, of freedom from
      the life captivity which threatened her soul, only to creep back, as a cat creeps back to the
      mouse with which it is playing, and slowly stretch forth his hand to seize her. This feeling
      became so strong in Anne that little by little there developed in her a nervous dread of
      Hamlin: every time that he approached her alone, that he fixed his eyes on her face or
      addressed her by her name, she was aware of a chill throughout her body, of a sudden pallor in
      her face; a chill, a pallor which, if noticed, must mean to Hamlin that she loved him.
Into this vague and painful suspense were vaguely mingled the suspicions which she had
      formed regarding Madame Elaguine. Confusedly Anne was conscious that the worthiness or
      unworthiness of Sacha was not a matter of indifference to her; if Sacha was a mere hysterical
      liar, she could not sincerely love
       Hamlin, Hamlin could not love her; and if this man and this
      woman did not love one another, Anne Brown was once more, what she had for a brief time
      imagined that she was no longer, the slave of her protector, as Mademoiselle Aïssé had been
      the slave of M. de Ferréol.
Suddenly, one day, there came a change, and with it the end of the terrible doubt and fear
      which were corroding Miss Brown’s soul. What had happened Anne never clearly understood; she
      only perceived a change, and guessed that it was connected in some manner with the sudden
      disappearance of Edmund Lewis, and with some tremendous quarrel between him and Hamlin which
      seemed to have preceded it. Mr Lewis, who had spent all his mornings in Hamlin’s studio, and
      all his evenings in Madame Elaguine’s boudoir, appeared to have sunk into the ground; his very
      name was scarcely mentioned; and Anne Brown, who hated the very sight of the little man with
      the sealing‐wax lips and green cat‐like eyes, who instinctively felt that he personified
       all the peculiarities which degraded Hamlin in her eyes,
      had a vague superstitious notion that now that he was gone everything would settle
      happily.
What had Lewis done? Had he insulted Madame Elaguine; and had this insulting, by a man who
      was his friend, of a woman whom he loved, made Hamlin suddenly conscious of his love for
      Sacha, and of his duty to protect an irresponsible little woman whom his indecision was
      putting into a false position? The more Miss Brown pored over the subject, the more did it
      seem as if there could be no other explanation.
But whatever the explanation, the result was unmistakable. On the score of ill‐health,
      Madame Elaguine had more or less dismissed all those admiring and sympathising friends who had
      given Hamlin so much umbrage, and Hamlin had become almost her sole and constant visitor. He
      appeared to have almost taken up his abode at the Russian’s. He came to Hammersmith for lunch
      as usual, but always
       found some excuse or other for leaving immediately after:
      he was painting a portrait of his cousin, and his cousin was too delicate to give him sittings
      except in her drawing‐room. He not merely neglected Anne, but obviously avoided her. He seemed
      to dread being left alone with her, as much as she, for such very different reasons, had
      dreaded to be left alone with him: when he did not succeed in getting away, he was moody and
      depressed; yet he seemed moody and depressed also whenever, as was frequently the case, he was
      sent for by his cousin, and whenever Anne met them together.
It seemed to Miss Brown as if she could understand it all so well: she, who was slow in
      understanding others, felt as if she knew Hamlin’s character as her own father must have known
      the construction and working of the machines which she remembered seeing him continually
      taking to pieces and setting up again. Hamlin had been, so Anne thought, obliged to admit to
      himself that he loved his
       cousin, and that he had made her love him; and he was
      depressed and irritated at his own inability to take any decided course, at his humiliation in
      finding that this was the end of all his romance with Anne, at his dread of being obliged,
      sooner or later, to tell Anne the truth; nay, Miss Brown thought she knew Hamlin sufficiently
      well to be persuaded that there entered into his feelings a certain annoyance at having to
      forfeit the exotic and unhealthy pleasure of being partially in love with two women at a time,
      and at the impetuosity of Sacha precipitating matters from a position of hesitation and
      self‐reproach, which was in some ways pleasant to his peculiar temper, into a situation
      requiring a definite and prompt solution.
Oh, Anne had not suffered silently these two years, without getting to understand the
      strange character to which her suffering was due. Yes, she knew Hamlin and what was passing in
      his mind; and the sense of power implied in this knowledge, the power of following all
       that he felt and thought, gave her a sort of pleasure,
      proportionate to that very sense of her difficulty in understanding any character save her
      own; a curious rare pleasure, in which mingled the consciousness of the price at which it had
      been bought, and the almost ineffable consciousness that this that she was studying concerned
      her no more; the pleasure, so often talked about, of the man who has escaped the shipwreck and
      looks down upon the dangerous waters in safety. Yes; she was safe; she was free.
It gave her a morbid pleasure also to watch Madame Elaguine, who, in the last month or so,
      ever since the quarrel with Edmund Lewis and the consequent intimacy with her cousin, had
      suddenly changed in her manner towards Anne—had shown a half‐savage, half‐childish desire to
      parade her conquest before her rival, to let her see how completely she had taken Hamlin away
      from her, to humiliate and insult her: the flaunting perversity of a new sultana towards an
      old one. Anne had hitherto insisted
       on thinking that Madame Elaguine was really a very noble
      little woman, and this revelation of a base wish to wound and humiliate, hurt her at first
      like some nauseous smell arising suddenly beneath her nostrils. But disgust was soon replaced
      by that new and secret pleasure in the consciousness of understanding this woman better than
      she understood herself; by the pleasure in feeling how wasted were all Madame Elaguine’s
      insults—how startled would not the little woman be, could she but know that every proof of her
      supremacy over Hamlin was to Miss Brown as each successively sawed‐through window‐bar is to
      the prisoner pining for the day of deliverance.
Anne felt herself getting into so singular a condition of excitement, losing so completely,
      under the pressure of these conflicting doubts and hopes in the past, of the great joy in the
      present, all her usual self‐composure and self‐control, that she took fiercely to working, to
      hurrying in every way through those studies
       which she had long since begun in the sickening
      often‐deferred hope that they might become her livelihood if she should ever be released from
      Hamlin. Miss Brown had often and often, even when the sense of hopelessness had been
      bitterest, consoled herself with what she believed to be unrealisable dreams for the future;
      and after going through many possible plans, she had decided that if—if—she should ever become
      her own mistress, she would employ, resolutely determined to return it to him some day, part
      of the money which Hamlin had settled upon her, in entering Girton or Newnham, where she would
      train herself to become a teacher in a public school. Almost mechanically, her studies (and
      restlessness, and the desire for something that should not be the harassing reality, had
      developed in her a perfect passion for study) fell into this programme. She had gone in for
      political economy, history, and what people are pleased to call moral sciences.
Now that liberty seemed on the point of
       being realised, and that she felt the want of something to
      steady her shaken nature, she applied herself to this work with redoubled ardour.
“If you go on like that you will get seedy, Annie,” warned the practical Marjory Leigh, now
      on the eve of becoming Mrs Harry Collett.
And Marjory Leigh proved right. The secret excitement of the last months, joined to the
      recent overwork, was too much for Anne. One day she was suddenly taken ill, and a little time
      later she was delirious.
“Nervous prostration from overwork,” said the doctors.
A great remorse, which was at the same time a great triumph, rose up in Hamlin’s heart.
“Sacha,” he cried, one day as Madame Elaguine came into the studio at Hammersmith, after
      visiting the sick woman, “it is I who am killing Anne; and it is you—you—who are forcing me to
      do it,”—and he tore the
       portrait of Madame Elaguine off the board of his easel, and
      pulled the paper, in long ribbons, through his fingers.
“It’s no great harm,” said the Russian, quietly; “I’m not quite such a guy as you
      represented me, Watty, and I’m the better pleased not to go down to posterity like that. As to
      Anne, don’t flatter yourself you are breaking her heart, for the excellent reason that there
      is none to break. Too much study! the doctor says, and he knows. A woman like that works only
      with her brain. Too much Euclid, Kant, Hegel, Fichte, &c. You needn’t flatter yourself
      that you are of the company. Seriously, can you be such a baby as to imagine that
      if that woman loved you she wouldn’t have turned me out of doors ages ago? Besides, she talked
      only of Girton College and of her cousin Richard when she was delirious, the nurse tells
      me.”
Madame Elaguine watched Hamlin as she let these words drop, then she burst out laughing.
“Poor Walter! what a misfortune it is to be a poet and to be vain! I am really grieved for
      you. But sooner or later you would understand that when a woman has no heart, but only ‘a
      muscle for pumping the blood to the extremities,’ as one of her professors calls it, she can’t
      love; and that, moreover, no woman will ever understand or love you, you silly person, except
      your cousin Sacha.”
Cosmo Chough, who had come to the studio door, and, not being troubled with scruples when
      base creatures like Madame Elaguine were concerned, and having, moreover, a violent curiosity
      about everything concerning the Eternal Feminine, had listened at the keyhole, affirmed to
      Miss Brown some time after that Madame Elaguine had then and there put her arms round Hamlin’s
      neck, and called him a poor, vain little baby.
ON recovering from that long delirium, during which she had raved only about the
      past and the future, about Miss Curzon, the Perrys, the Villa Arnolfini, Cousin Dick, Girton
      College, and political economy, but never—by some singular obliviousness of the present—about
      Hamlin and Sacha,—the first persons that Anne Brown recognised about her were the Leigh girls.
      Marjory had postponed her marriage in order to help her sister in nursing Miss Brown; and Mrs
      Macgregor had gladly accepted their proposal to settle for the time being in the house at
      Hammersmith, she herself being far too unpractical to be of any use. Anne’s impressions were
      vague, diffuse; the ideas aud sensations, the slight amount of life
       of one day of early convalescence being, so to speak,
      diluted into what were really days and weeks, day and night succeeding each other confusedly
      to the girl, but feebly awake and for ever falling asleep. It was a dream, but a pleasant one,
      consisting of veiled misty impressions, separated by tracts of lethargy: impressions of the
      kind faces and voices of Mary and Marjory, of the gleams of sunshine on the carpet, of the
      waving of treetops outside the window, of the whistle of the steamboat on the Thames; the song
      of the canary in the housekeeper’s room—the cry of the milkman; of the bunches of big red and
      yellow roses put down upon the sheet before her; of the broth and jelly and tea feebly
      refused, and yet greedily swallowed,—trifles, nothings, but transformed by the haze of mixed
      weakness and relief into things possessing a charm, and never to be forgotten.
The mere sense of rest and renovation constituted a sort of happiness, with which mingled
      the consciousness of the kindness of those
       round her,—of the Leigh girls and Mrs Macgregor, who were
      in her room nearly all day; of Mrs Spencer, who came from the other end of London every
      afternoon; of Chough and Cousin Dick, who came to make inquiries; even of Hamlin, whose
      magnificent bundles and baskets of flowers and fruit arrived regularly, together with the
      bunch of sweet‐peas and pinks which Chough had bought at the greengrocer’s, or the sprigs of
      laburnum which he had stolen in the park. Everything in the world seemed so good and simple;
      all worries and doubts had gone with the dreadful visions of the delirious nights. Anne had
      never in her life felt so simply, completely happy; perhaps because, with her tense and tragic
      character, perfect happiness was possible only in weakness and vagueness.
Little by little the past became concrete once more; but it became concrete as the past, all
      her doubts and difficulties remaining far distant behind her, like the Alps which the
      traveller has arduously crossed, and looks back
       upon from the warm Lombard plain. She took up her position
      and feelings where she had left them: she felt herself free. At first she could scarcely tell
      why, as we sometimes can scarcely account to ourselves for something which has happened the
      previous day, and which, though forgotten, fills us with vague pleasure or pain on awakening.
      Then she began to understand once more, and to add to her recollections what she could make
      out of the present. She noticed that the Leighs scarcely ever spoke of Hamlin; that they
      brought in his flowers, books, and messages with a certain constraint, even, she thought, with
      an occasional look of disgust and indignation. And they never, never once mentioned Madame
      EIaguine.
“What has become of Sacha Elaguine?” she asked one day, rolling her head, with face even
      paler than before, and black crisp hair just beginning to cluster after cropping short, on the
      pillows. “Has she gone out of town? You have never spoken about her, Mary.”
Mary Leigh, who was seated, holding Anne’s thin white hand, did not raise her head; and
      Marjory, who was pouring out the tea hard by, flushed scarlet.
“Haven’t I? Oh yes, I must,” answered Mary Leigh, still keeping her eyes on the pattern of
      the carpet. “Madame Elaguine? Oh, she’s just as usual.”
“Odious little brute,” scowled Marjory.
Mary raised her head sharply, and gave her sister a look of reproof.
Anne asked no more. She had understood: during her illness Sacha had tightened her hold on
      Hamlin; the Leighs had seen it, or been told, and Mary was afraid lest her sister should let
      out to the invalid what she imagined to be a heart‐breaking secret.
“I am free!” thought Anne; and repeated these words to herself every time that one of the
      Leighs spoke coldly of Hamlin, or looked savage when he was mentioned. And sometimes she
      fancied that she could distinguish in the face and manner of the true‐hearted Mary,
       of the indignant Marjory, the pain and perplexity of
      foreseeing that they possessed a terrible secret, that they must make a terrible revelation.
      Once, she felt sure, Mary’s heart had almost burst for her silence. Miss Leigh had brought in
      Hamlin’s usual gift of flowers, a bunch of beautiful white roses and jasmine; she was going to
      hand it to Anne, when her face suddenly contracted, and she stuffed the flowers roughly into a
      jar.
“Won’t you let me smell Mr Hamlin’s flowers, Mary?” asked Anne from her bed.
Mary Leigh gave her a long strange look.
“They aren’t fit for you, Anne,” said Mary, in a hoarse voice; “they’re horrible, morbid
      sort of things—they’ll just make your head ache.”
“My head is much stronger than you think,” said Anne; “let me have them—they are lovely. The
      jasmine doesn’t smell like ordinary jasmine. What is it?—it smells like the incense that Sacha
      Elaguine burns in her boudoir; it’s nice, but too strong. I
       wonder whether they have been in her boudoir to catch it.
      It’s very kind of Mr Hamlin to bring them to me, especially as”—Anne looked up with a smile
      which frightened Mary Leigh out of her wits—“he doesn’t care a bit about me any longer, you
      know.”
Mary Leigh threw herself on her knees before Anne’s bed, and drawing her head to her, kissed
      her.
“Oh, Annie, Annie, my darling!” she cried.
“You are good,” answered Anne—“you are good to love me so. But Mr Hamlin is also very good,
      although he doesn’t love me. I am very happy—so happy, Mary dear.”
“She is mad,” thought Mary, in terror, as Anne threw her head back, smiling, her onyx‐grey
      eyes beaming, on the pillow. And she resolved that, as long as she could help, Anne Brown
      should not know what she knew, and what, every time that Hamlin’s name was mentioned, sickened
      her heart.
Some days later Miss Brown was sufficiently well to exchange her bed for a couch in the
       drawing‐room down‐stairs; and then Hamlin asked whether he
      might be admitted to see her for a few minutes. He seemed painfully impressed at the sight of
      Anne, whom he was accustomed to see looking the embodiment of physical strength, a sort of
      primeval warrior‐woman, stretched out on the sofa, so thin and hollow‐checked, so pale, with a
      pallor quite different from the natural opaque ivory pallor of her complexion; so weak of
      voice and gesture, so wholly despoiled, it seemed to him, of her usual sombre haughtiness:
      resigned, and with the gentleness of a sick child. He was silent and depressed, as a man might
      be who knew her to be more seriously ill than she thought; and yet, as Anne was well aware, it
      was most obvious to him and to every one that she was entirely out of danger, and rapidly
      recovering. Miss Brown understood: he was weighed down, but with a worse conscience than Mary
      Leigh,—by the thought that this woman was unaware of the sort of treachery which was being
      committed behind her back.
       Anne, on the other hand, felt more really pleased to see
      him than she had done this long time past; it seemed as if, now that the bond which tied her
      to him was loosened, she could see once more all that was amiable and noble in him,—that she
      could like him again, feel towards him simply, naturally, as towards a friend and benefactor.
      And she felt sorry for his depression, for what she imagined to be his self‐reproach; desirous
      of telling him almost, then and there, that he need not make himself unhappy, that he was free
      to love his cousin.
Miss Brown was still unfit for much conversation; and Hamlin seemed glad to cut short the
      interview. She asked him to raise one of the blinds; and when the light streamed upon his
      face, she thought she saw in it something unusual, something beyond his mere usual melancholy,
      a lassitude and look of being worried; again she felt sorry for him.
“How is your cousin Sacha?” she asked.
“She is well,” he answered briefly, “and
       —sends you many messages. I don’t let her come, because she
      would excite you. Goodbye.”
Every afternoon Hamlin returned for a short time. Anne’s first impression was merely
      strengthened; Hamlin was extraordinarily depressed, worried‐looking, taciturn. Anne felt
      really sorry for him; he was evidently, she thought, eating his heart out in doubts and
      self‐reproach; he had gone too far with Sacha to retreat, and yet his engagement to Miss Brown
      forbade his taking a decisive step. After all, he was truer and nobler than she had thought,
      more of her real Hamlin of former days; she reflected that this hostility of temperament and
      aims between them, this long and sickening endurance of a bond which suited neither, had made
      her unjust and bitter towards him, prone to seek for only his worse sides, neglectful of his
      good ones. She felt that it was not the least benefit of her release that she could now be
      perfectly grateful once more; that she could give to this man the
       affection which he really deserved, and which she really
      felt, now that the terrible debt of love was cancelled. She was sorry, very sorry for him, and
      determined that, since he had not the heart, it was for her to speak. But invariably, and as
      if warned by a secret intuition, he had interrupted the conversation, and gone away whenever
      she had been on the point of speaking. The bare name of Madame Elaguine seemed enough to send
      him away; and yet, whenever Anne succeeded in making him speak of his cousin, he had spoken of
      her with a strange bitterness, and almost disgust.
“He is mean, after all,” thought Anne; “he is angry with poor Sacha for being the cause of
      his finding himself in a false position.” And she determined that she would speak, not to him
      but to Madame Elaguine; she felt that she could not endure the way in which he would assuredly
      seek to whitewash himself at his cousin’s expense. Mean, very mean; nay, something more than
      mean. What irritation or hypocrisy could induce him to speak
       of the woman whom he loved with a sort of constant
      innuendo, a constant sort of undercurrent of disgust?
And again she began to despise and dislike him. Another thing soon struck her. There was
      something unusual about Hamlin’s appearance. Somewhat effeminate he had always been in his
      aristocratic refinement; but now it seemed to her as if there were in his face a something,
      half physical, half spiritual, a vague, helpless, half‐stupefied look, which made her think of
      that hysterical tippling little poet Dennistoun, whom she disliked so much. Her mind reverted
      to what she had heard about Edmund Lewis having, at one period, induced Hamlin to take
      opium.
“Is Mr Lewis back?” she asked.
Hamlin flushed all over.
“Lewis is not likely to return,” he answered briefly.
What was the meaning of it all? Hamlin was also, she noticed, no longer as careful in his
      dress as he had formerly been; there was
       something vaguely rowdy about him. And once, as he stooped
      over her to rearrange the cushions under her head, it seemed to her—was it true or not?—that
      she felt a sickening whiff, like those which she well remembered since her childhood, when her
      father had come in from drinking and taken her on his knees.
Was it possible that Hamlin, weak as he was, and feeling himself cornered in a false
      position, had taken to drinking—to drinking, which had been the fatal vice of his family, of
      his brother, father, and of his uncles, in order to rid himself of his worries?
She must speak to Madame Elaguine. She must let them know that they were free.
WHILE she was in this perplexity about Hamlin, Miss Brown received a visit from her
      cousin Dick. She had scarcely seen him, and never alone, since that memorable walk home from
      Professor Richmond’s lecture. Whether from the sense that he had gone too far, that his
      violence had offended and frightened her; or whether, more probably, from his having rushed to
      the conclusion that she was unattainable and perhaps unworthy of his seeking, Richard Brown
      had kept studiously out of her way.
For the first time in his life he came in with hesitation and almost shyness. He sat down by
      the side of her arm‐chair, and spoke with a gentleness, a courtesy, that were quite unusual
       in him, and had a charm just from their contrast with his
      downright and gruff personality. The conversation rolled upon various indifferent subjects; he
      seemed to be feeling his way to something, trying to decide whether she was strong enough to
      admit of his saying something which weighed on his mind.
“You are nearly recovered now?” he asked. “Do you feel as if you were getting your strength
      back, Anne?”
“Oh yes,” she answered; “I feel wonderfully well. I have been for a drive these last few
      days, and I am sure I could walk, if only they would let me. I only feel very tired and lazy
      every now and then.”
There was a pause.
“Do you remember what you told me that afternoon when we walked home from Richmond’s
      lecture—a rainy day at the end of March?” he asked suddenly.
“Yes, I do.”
“You said, if you remember, that you did not care for Mr Hamlin, and that you felt
       yourself bound to him only by gratitude and the sense that
      he wanted you—do you remember, Nan?”
“I remember perfectly. Well?”
Richard Brown had spoken slowly and watching her face; and he seemed surprised at the
      perfect calm which he read in it.
“Well, I think it is right that you should know what is by this time known by all your
      acquaintances. Walter Hamlin no longer wants you; he has entirely thrown you over for another
      woman. He is—I don’t know exactly what to call it, and don’t mean any innuendo—well—the
      accepted lover of Madame Elaguine.”
Anne nodded.
“I know it,” she answered coolly. “I have known it, or at least guessed it, since a long
      while.”
Richard was surprised, and, unconsciously perhaps to himself, mortified. He had always
      resented his cousin’s fidelity to Hamlin, had always, with his tendency to seek for base
       motives wherever he could not sympathise, suspected that
      this fidelity was a mere cover for an unworthy love of the fine æsthetic gentleman or for his
      fortune and position; and he had anticipated a certain pleasure in seeing Anne wince beneath
      his revelation.
“It is no business of mine to pass a judgment over Mr Hamlin,” he proceeded slowly, and
      wondering, suspicious as he always was with women, of the genuineness of Anne’s
      imperturbability; “the whole business seems to me quite consonant with all my notions of his
      character.”
“I do not think Mr Hamlin has acted dishonourably towards me,” put in Anne, quietly; “on the
      contrary, I feel sure that he reproaches himself much more than he need.”
“Very likely. What I was going to say is merely that this new turn which matters have taken
      necessarily implies an entire change in your position towards Mr Hamlin. He no longer wants
      you; you are therefore free. Am I correct in my view of the case?”
He was speaking with a deference to her opinion quite new in him.
“As far as I can judge,” answered Anne, playing with a big lapis‐lazuli rosary which she had
      taken off her neck, “I think you are quite correct, Dick. I believe I am free.”
She hesitated and spoke the last words almost inaudibly, as if superstitiously afraid that
      they should be heard.
“In that case I presume you will have to remodel your life. Have you thought of any
      plans?”
“I have thought over the matter a good deal. My intention, as soon as Mr Hamlin and I have
      come to an explanation, which will be shortly, is to go to Ireland for a few months with Mary
      Leigh, to finish getting well and to finish some preparatory work, and then to go up to
      Girton. I should be able to pass the entrance examination in another three months. You see,”
      she added, “Mr Hamlin, in spending the money that he has in turning me into
       a lady, has made it difficult for me to take to any such
      livelihood as would have naturally been mine under other circumstances; and I think,
      therefore, that I have a right to invest a portion of the money which he has settled upon me,
      and which he fully intended me to keep in any ease, in qualifying myself for the only sort of
      business for which I am now fit. He has settled upon me the equivalent of five hundred a‐year,
      apart from the expenses of this house, of which I know nothing. Much less than that would more
      than cover the expenses of keeping me at Girton and of starting me as a teacher or journalist;
      and once fairly started, I hope I should be able to support myself and gradually to refund
      this money. Do you think that would be fair, Dick? You see, it is quite useless for me to
      think of ever repaying, even if money could repay in such matters, what Mr Hamlin has spent
      upon me during all these years.”
She seemed to hesitate, to be afraid of being
       mean, of appearing to take advantage of Hamlin’s
      generosity.
“Do you really contemplate renouncing the fortune which Mr Hamlin settled on you? giving up
      all the luxury to which he has accustomed you, Annie?”
Richard Brown, disinterested though he was, was too deeply impressed with the mercenary
      temper of mankind, to believe very easily in such sentiments.
“Why, of course,” answered Anne. “When Mr Hamlin marries his cousin, he will find, that he
      has not too much with all his money. And I would certainly not keep any of it as soon as I
      could do without; though heaven knows I am not ungrateful, nor so silly as to fancy that I
      should be in the very least lightening my obligation towards him.”
Richard did not answer for a moment. “Listen,” he said, not without hesitation “I am nearer
      to you than Walter Hamlin and whatever I am, I owe it to your father. I find I have just made
      a very considerable
       and quite unexpected profit off some mining shares which Mr
      Gillespie left me. Let me advance you out of this money whatever may be wanted to defray your
      expenses at college; you will repay me when you find it convenient. In this way, you will be
      entirely independent of Mr Hamlin at once: you can let him have all his money.”
Richard Brown hesitated, in a way very singular in his cut‐and‐dry nature; he seemed
      prepared for a rebuff.
“You are very kind, Dick; but I can’t accept your offer. I owe it to Mr Hamlin, in return
      for all the generosity he has shown towards me and would still show, that I should never
      accept anything from any man but him, even if I were not resolved never to put myself under
      such an obligation again. I have no right to prefer your generosity to his.”
Richard Brown was silent. Then, after a moment, they fell to talking about the plans and
      theories which occupied Cousin Dick’s mind. He was unusually gentle and modest;
       he really seemed to be losing some of that narrowness which
      had been the ugly side of his powerful and upright nature.
“You are becoming quite tolerant, Dick,” remarked Anne. “Six months ago you could never have
      conceived that any one unlike yourself or differing from your views could have anything good
      in him. I am very glad; it will make you more hopeful of the world, and show you a lot of
      energy and good faith which deserves to be united to your own, and which you would formerly
      have thrown upon the dust‐heap.”
“You are right,” answered Brown. “I feel that I have diminished my own usefulness by not
      admitting any other kind of usefulness than my own. I often catch myself thinking, now, that
      my great danger lies in my tendency to underrate people; sometimes it seems as if, unless I
      can struggle against it, it will invade and sterilise my whole nature.”
“I am so glad you feel like that, Dick.”
“And do you know,” he continued, “I
       think this change is due to you; knowing you has shown me
      how horribly unreasonable and unjust I am apt to be in my preconceived notions. I really did
      think you an æsthete once, Annie; nay, at one time, I was so base as to think that you were
      base, that you cared for Hamlin’s position and money and good looks, while not caring for him.
      Will you forgive me, Annie?”
He bent over her, and took her hand. She let him hold it for a minute. She felt so strangely
      free, so safe, so happy somehow with this man, whose presence had so often been a threat and
      an insult.
“I wonder whether you will ever learn to be just to Mr Hamlin,” she mused.
“I will do my best.”
She had withdrawn her hand from his.
“I wonder whether I have ever been just to Mr Hamlin,” said Anne.
Richard reddened.
“What makes you say that, Nan?”
“I don’t know. I feel how difficult it is
       for a nature like mine to be just towards, to understand,
      any one outside it.”
“Can you be just towards me?” he suddenly asked.
“I am, I think.”
“Do you think, then,” went on Richard Brown, “that during the time you spend at Girton you
      could try a little and understand me,—you could try and like me a little, Annie?”
“I do like you, Richard,” she answered coldly; but a quiet happiness, like that of a
      windless, half‐covered morning in the fields, stole over her.
“I don’t mean this,” he said, rising. “I want you to like me, Nan, as much—as much as you
      thought you liked Walter Hamlin.”
Anne shook her head sadly.
“That is quite impossible,” she said: “one doesn’t feel like that twice, I fancy, Richard,
      any more than one believes twice in angels or such things.”
Richard Brown frowned. She could never pluck Hamlin, Hamlin in some shape, real or false,
      out of her heart.
“Good‐bye,” he said; “I fear I have tired you. Annie,” he added, “it is idiotic, isn’t it?
      but all the time you were ill, even until I came into this room, I kept hoping that you might
      have lost your looks—that Hamlin might be quite unable ever to care for you again—that you
      might have ceased to be, in this sort of way, above me. And yet, when I saw you, I was glad it
      was not so. Oh, Nan, promise me you will try and like me a little.”
“Please don’t say that, Dick. I have been a slave, a prisoner. Can’t you understand that my
      great joy is the sense of my freedom, my sense of belonging to no one, caring about no one?
      Can’t you understand that it seems horrible to me to even think that I could ever care for any
      one again? Can’t you let me enjoy my liberty, at least until I have realised that it isn’t a
      dream?”
She spoke with impetuosity, but gently; and her cousin did not feel rebuked.
“By the way,” he said, “I suppose you have heard who is expected here soon—your old friend,
      Melton Perry.”
“Melton Perry!” cried Anne. It seemed such centuries since she had heard that name last.
      “Oh, I shall be so glad to see him, he is such a good man!”
She walked up and down after Dick had left.
Melton Perry! the name brought up the far, far distant past—a vision of the untidy house at
      Florence; of Mrs Perry’s lean and Sapphic profile; of the tall grass and crushed herbs in the
      vineyard of the Villa Arnolfini; of Hamlin as she had first known him—a mysterious,
      unattainable ideal high above her; of the studio at the top of the tower; of herself, as she
      recollected herself to have been, a sombre, unhappy creature, with whose identity she seemed
      to have no connection, and into
       whose dark and confused mind she felt unable to see. There
      was something very painful in this sudden return of the past in company with her old friend,
      and Anne thought bitterly of the difference between the dreams of happiness, so positive, so
      perfect, of those days, and the reality of happiness, so negative, so poor—consisting in what?
      in being left to herself—which belonged to her now. And yet, after all, as she looked into her
      girlhood before Hamlin’s coming, she recognised the same negativeness; she had wished to be
      free, to be a daily governess, to depend upon no one for her livelihood, to be able to know
      something of a wider life. She had never hoped, scarcely even wished, for happiness; the
      semblance of it had passed before her eyes, had, for a brief time, made her life more acutely
      sensitive; but she returned to the negative: it was the law of her life.
And, as she cleared her mind of all vain regrets, she became aware that, in a manner,
       this return upon her scene of Melton Perry was like the
      ringing of the bell, the orchestral flourish, which ends a piece as it has begun it. The
      comedy of her love for Hamlin, and of Hamlin’s love for her, was over; and she felt impatient
      for Melton Perry’s arrival.
THE day after this visit from Cousin Dick, came the first visit from Madame
      Elaguine. It seemed to Anne that, from the very moment of her entering the room, she could
      perceive something strange in Sacha’s manner—something brazen, flaunting, cruel. The little
      woman somehow no longer looked so small and that childish appealingness had entirely left her
      manner; she was self‐possessed, cynical, triumphant. Her very dress was different from
      anything in which Miss Brown had hitherto seen her; exotic indeed and fantastic, like
      everything that she wore, but certainly not turned out by Madame Elaguine’s maid. She kissed
      Anne familiarly on both cheeks, enveloping her in an atmosphere of heady Eastern perfumes.
“Poor Annie,” she said, “you have been very ill, and must have thought me a great brute for
      not coming to see you before. But Walter absolutely forbade my coming—stood in front of your
      door, so to speak, and shut it in my face. He pretended that I should have excited you too
      much. Perhaps I should; I am a wretched, excitable creature. Perhaps he was right; what do you
      think?” Madame Elaguine fixed her eyes on those of Anne; a long look of scrutiny and triumph,
      as if she had expected to see her wince.
“I think Mr Hamlin was quite mistaken,” answered Miss Brown quietly, understanding the
      meaning of that look. “I am much less subject to excitement than he supposes; and your
      presence would not have excited me more than any one else’s.”
“Really!” and Madame Elaguine’s mouth took a peculiar little sneering turn; “I should have
      thought that I was exciting, now. Not more exciting, for instance, than the Miss
      Leighs? or than your cousin, Mr Richard
       Brown?” and she again looked scrutinisingly at Anne, who
      merely shook her head. “By the way, your cousin has quite cut me of late, Annie—ask him why. I
      suspect that he thinks me a dangerous woman, quite without moral ballast,—what my German
      teacher used to call Sittlicher Ernst. He was such a funny
      creature that German teacher of mine; did I ever tell you about him? He taught at the school
      where I was in Petersburg: a thin lank creature, with long red wrists projecting a yard from
      his sleeves, and a waistcoat which would ride up whenever he was excited; he used to lean
      against the wall, any part of his body at random, and bend and sway the rest of him about,
      like a caterpillar. He taught us German literature, and was very shocked because I said the
      ‘Bride of Corinth’ was the only amusing thing Goethe had ever written. He believed in
      Schopenhauer—and hated women, and me in particular, because I had no Sittlicher Ernst; and one day, what do you think he did? he fell on his knees and
      tried
       to catch me round the waist. Poor devil! he was turned out
      of doors, and drowned himself later. I wonder whether it was out of despair at my want of
       Sittlicher Ernst? He was such a queer creature. I sometimes
      think, after all, he was the only man I could really have loved, if only his waistcoat had not
      ridden up, and his wrists projected so much from his cuffs.”
Sacha laughed, and bit her lower lip a little, so that it suddenly became scarlet, like the
      lips of Edmund Lewis. She threw herself back in her chair, one foot crossed over the other,
      her eyes fixed on the Venetian chandelier, which caught opalescent lights in the sunshine; she
      was smiling, perhaps in recollection of the professor with his wrists and his waistcoat.
Anne did not know what to say; the presence of this woman seemed to freeze her, like the
      contact of some clammy thing: it was as if the soul of Edmund Lewis had entered her body and
      had become more active, more
       subtle in its new habitation. Mechanically her eyes rested
      upon Madame Elaguine’s dress, a marvellous vague thing, made in some confused resemblance of
      the men’s dress of Moliére’s time,—a crimson plush coat and a big man’s cravat of Flanders
      lace, but all bursting out, by every conceivable slashing and gap, into a mass of lace, which
      hung about her like a cloud of thistle‐down, beneath which her thin and nervous little body
      seemed to twist and writhe with every word.
“It’s a pretty frock, isn’t it?” she remarked, looking down upon it with satisfaction. “Oh
      no, I didn’t make this; I am bored with always making my own frocks. It’s from Worth. I swore
      I would bring round Watty from belief in pre‐Adamitic skirts and purfled sleeves and
      eighteen‐penny medievalism to a belief in Worth; you know he used always to rant at Paris
      clothes. Well, I’ve been as good as my word; this is from Worth, and what’s more, Walter has
      paid my bill. Humiliating, rather, isn’t it? but then, you see, I’m a pauper,
       and can’t buy Worth frocks on a thousand a‐year, including
      subscription for a copy of Chough’s new translation of ‘Villon,’ with all the improprieties
      annotated, Dutch paper, morocco, rough edges, price three guineas, can I?”
Anne flushed. Hamlin had paid for Sacha’s dress! And yet, had Hamlin not paid for not merely
      one, but all Anne’s dresses these years—nay, for everything that Anne saw about her—nay, for
      everything almost that Anne knew and was? And still, how was it, there was a difference? and
      as she looked at Sacha in her fantastic Molière coat of crimson plush and watered white silk
      and lace, which Hamlin had paid for, she could not get out of her mind the image of certain
      French kept women whom she had seen, in their elaborate dresses and well‐appointed victorias,
      driving in the Park. It was very unjust and horrible, yet she could not get it out of her
      mind.
“Walter is a queer creature,” went on Madame Elaguine; “somewhat like my German
       caterpillar professor: I don’t mean in the matter of wrists
      and waistcoats, but in the matter of women. I don’t know how to say it; my ideas aren’t ever
      very clear: I suppose it’s want of Sittlicher Ernst, and
      also because I’m hysterical—at least the doctors say so; because I insist on having my own
      way. I mean that Walter, for instance, hates me in a certain sense just as that professor did.
      I’m sure he sometimes feels as if he could throttle me, because I have no Sittlicher Ernst, and because I made love to him, and offered him
      barley‐sugar and tops when I was ten. And yet! Ah, well, I suppose I am a wretch! Oh, Annie
      dear, I fear, I fear I am a wretch!” and Madame Elaguine suddenly jumped up from her chair and
      flung her arms round Miss Brown’s neck and kissed her, with such violence that Anne felt her
      lips almost like leeches and her teeth pressing into her cheeks.
“Oh Annie, I am an unworthy wretch! I am a beast towards you!” she cried.
Anne felt a horror, a kind of fear of death;
       and yet she felt sorry for this woman; was she not a wretch
      in not clearing up the position—in letting this woman continue to love in shame, when she
      might love openly and honourably? She loosened herself from Sacha’s embrace.
“Madame Elaguine” she began, feeling her face still burning from this strangling embrace,
      and mechanically smoothing her ruffled hair, “I have long wanted to tell you something with
      regard to Mr Hamlin—indeed I feel I ought to have told it you before, but . . .” At this
      moment the door opened and Hamlin entered.
Anne had missed her opportunity; it was impossible to speak before Hamlin, although she had
      once or twice contemplated clearing up matters to him and his cousin at the same time. But it
      was impossible now. Sacha had something strange, brazen, about her, which froze Anne’s soul.
      Hamlin was listless, depressed, with that hang‐dog, stupefied air that Miss Brown had noticed
      in him of late. He
       spoke little, barely answered any of Sacha’s remarks: every
      time that he raised his eyes upon his cousin, it was with an expression that amounted almost
      to disgust; and she seemed nowise hurt, but rather amused and pleased at this look, and took a
      pleasure in provoking it by a hundred absurdities, and by a sort of bullying way, as if
      expressly to show her power over this sullen creature.
They did not stay long. Madame Elaguine rose, and Hamlin mechanically followed her example:
      was it that he could not see her go away by herself, or that he was afraid of being left alone
      with Miss Brown?
“This is my first visit to you since your illness, and it will be my last for a little
      time,” said Madame Elaguine, letting Hamlin help her on with her cloak, and spinning out the
      operation, as if to show that this depressed and sullen creature, for all his sulkiness, was
      her slave.
“Are you going away?” cried Anne, a sudden fear entering her heart. Sacha noticed
       her involuntary flush, and mistook its meaning.
“Only for a fortnight,” she answered, with an odd smile. “Oh no; I can’t do without London
      and my friends—hideous London and disagreeable friends, at least so far as Walter is
      concerned. I suppose it’s my perversity and want of Sittlicher
       Ernst, again. I am going to Paris this evening. I have a notion of taking Boris out
      of his English school and sending him to the Lycée. I feel I have had a surfeit of
      respectability and æstheticism, and that I’d rather my son were a Frenchman and a Bohemian.
      It’s a whim. Perhaps it will make me return a frantic Anglomaniac. Fancy if Boris were to grow
      up a thing like this!” pointing to Hamlin,—“a horrible pseudo Sir Galahad, as Watty was at
      sixteen. Faugh! I couldn’t bear it. Good‐bye, Annie dear; I fear you must think me an immoral
      woman, and that my German professor wasn’t so far wrong. Good‐bye, my beautiful Madonna of the
      Glaciers,” and again Miss Brown was half
       stifled in the cloud of oriental perfumes, as Madame
      Elaguine kissed her cavalierly on both cheeks.
“Come along, Watty!” cried Sacha; “can’t you learn to open the door for a woman?”
“Good‐bye, Miss Brown,” and Hamlin gave a little sigh of weariness as he pressed Anne’s
      hand.
Miss Brown remained in a state of vague fear all that day. Was that love—at least on
      Hamlin’s part—that look of bored disgust with which he had responded to Madame Elaguine’s
      provocation? Anne grew pale at the notion of that fortnight of Sacha’s absence. Would Hamlin,
      fickle, easily wounded in his vanity, sated with Madame Elaguine’s Russian ways, remain
      faithful to the absent woman? Would he not rather return and begin afresh that old, old story
      of Platonic adoration, of self‐reproach, with what his cousin called Madonna of the Glaciers?
      And as Hamlin was leaving, he had said to her half audibly, “If you will allow me, I will come
      to‐morrow afternoon
       and see what can be done to my Vision of Beatrice, if you
      will give me a sitting.”
A sitting! Anne’s heart had sunk at the mere word.
But the next morning she found on the tray on which her breakfast was brought up a twisted
      note. It was from Hamlin, written late the previous night.
“DEAR MISS BROWN,” it said,—“I fear you will think me very uncourteous to break through our
      engagement for to‐morrow morning. But I am feeling rather anxious lest Madame Elaguine should
      get imposed on about the school for her boy; so I shall join her for a few days in Paris. Pray
      forgive my apparent rudeness.—Yours sincerely, W. H.”
“What’s your news, Annie?” asked Mary Leigh, who had come in to see after her invalid. “You
      look as if you had come in for a fortune!”
Anne made an effort and laughed.
“It was only Mr Hamlin postponing a sitting which I was to give him. I really
       don’t feel much like sitting yet. Mr Hamlin’s gone to Paris
      to look after a school for Boris Elaguine.”
“And Madame Elaguine?”
“Madame Elaguine—went yesterday.”
“Oh, indeed!” answered Mary Leigh; and as she said that, a wave of red came into Miss
      Brown’s pale face—why, Anne could not herself have explained.
THE day after Hamlin’s departure to join Madame Elaguine, Richard Brown paid
      another visit at Hammersmith; and he dropped in frequently in the next few days. He never
      spoke of his hopes, he never inquired about Anne’s plans; he scarcely so much as alluded to
      Hamlin’s departure. He seemed satisfied to see his cousin, to explain to her all the things
      that he hoped some day to do. This forbearance, this delicate discretion, on the part of one
      of the most tactless and exacting of men; this something which implied that Cousin Dick had
      learned to consult her wishes, touched Miss Brown very much. Love, or by whatever other name
      (since the name of love was discredited to Anne) she might
       choose to call Richard’s strong and steady feeling, seemed
      to have purified this powerful and generous temper of that alloy of coarse and contemptuous
      suspicion that had occasionally repelled her so much.
Richard Brown had become comparatively quite charitable in his judgments, sincerely anxious
      to be just. He tried to see things a little from her point of view—nay, even to understand
      whatever good there was or had been in Hamlin. This big and self‐reliant man, who had already
      thought and done so much for himself and for others, began to appear to his cousin as less
      mature than she had fancied, and even less self‐reliant; new instincts and perceptions, new
      sides of his nature—making it fuller, richer, purer—developing under her influence. Anne did
      not love her cousin; she did not even anticipate loving him anything as she had once loved
      Hamlin. She recognised that, in her nature, love could exist only for an ideal, and in an
      ideal she could never again believe; but she became aware of
       a relation of frank comradeship, of mutual respect and
      attachment and usefulness, which warmed her nature, and made hopes and projects bud and
      blossom up. She was nervously anxious for that fortnight to have come to an end, to have
      Hamlin back, to speak to him; and yet, at the same time, it seemed to her dreadful that these
      few days of freedom from care, freedom from the shadow which had so long hung over her, should
      so soon come to an end.
The fortnight was drawing to a close; Hamlin would soon be back. Anne began to be filled
      with unendurable impatience; she even, once or twice, began a letter telling him everything,
      and tore it up only from the fear that it might seem harsh, ungrateful, that it might (and the
      idea was terrible to her) make him suppose that she was jealous, that she loved him. It was a
      great relief to her when there suddenly came a telegram, sent on from Hamlin’s lodgings, and
      opened by his servant, which announced for next evening the arrival
       of Melton Perry, who knew nothing of Hamlin’s momentary
      absence from town.
“Oh, Aunt Claudia,” cried Anne, “Mr Perry is coming to‐morrow evening! Do you think—oh, do
      you think you could have him to stay here till Mr Hamlin return?”
“Who is Mr Perry?” asked Chough, who was dining with them, suddenly pricking up his ears at
      Anne’s excited tone. Could he be the explanation of Anne’s indifference to
      Hamlin? thought the poet of the Eternal Feminine.
“Mr Perry,” answered Anne, “is the gentleman in whose house I was a servant until I met Mr
      Hamlin—the father of the little girls whose maid I was. He was very kind to me, and I am very
      fond of him.”
Cosmo Chough stared at her in amazement. He had quite forgotten, indeed he had never
      properly realised, that this queenly woman, this more than Dante’s Beatrice or Petrarch’s
      Laura, had actually been a nursemaid—a servant! She a servant! he repeated to himself,
       looking at Miss Brown as she sat opposite him; at this
      goddess, it seemed to him, with the wonderful face as of one of Michelangelo’s Titanesses; the
      solemn, mysterious, onyx‐grey eyes; the something superhumanly grand in person and movement.
      To have been a servant, and to remind people of it, was his next thought; and this Cosmo
      Chough, conscious of his supposed father the duke, and of his real father the apothecary at
      Limerick, was absolutely unable to comprehend.
“Mr Perry, except Miss Curzon, was the only friend I ever had, until—until I met Mr Hamlin,”
      went on Miss Brown. “You will give him the spare room, Aunt Claudia, for my sake, won’t you?
      And you will let me arrange it for him, and make it look a little untidy, and put match‐boxes
      and pipe‐lights about, so that he may feel a little comfortable.”
Mrs Macgregor laughed.
“Put as many pipe‐lights about as you please, my dear; but if he fill Watty’s studio with
      pipe‐smoke, you will be responsible, not I.”
The next afternoon Anne Brown was just in the midst of what she called making the spare room
      look untidy, taking out the superfluous æsthetic furniture which would, she knew, fidget her
      former master to death, dragging in leather arm‐chairs instead of imitation Queen Anne things,
      and piling newspapers and novels on the table, when a visitor was announced. She went down
      into the drawing‐room, and, to her surprise, found Edmund Lewis. An inexpressible sense of
      disgust came over her, This man personified all that she hated most of that past with which
      she was about to break for ever. The little man with the auburn beard and sealing‐wax lips was
      considerably less free‐and‐easy and sultan‐like than usual; his humiliation, whatever it was,
      had evidently done him good. Indeed, Miss Brown was almost beginning to ask herself whether
      she might not have been a little unjust towards him also, so respectful and amiable had he
      made himself, when it began to dawn upon her that there was an explanation
       for his visit much more in keeping with the character she
      had hitherto attributed to him.
“I hear that Walter Hamlin is in Paris with his cousin,” he had remarked, after a few
      minutes’ conversation. He had tried to say it in an off‐hand manner; but Anne had felt his
      green eyes fixed curiously upon her.
“Yes; they have gone to settle about sending Boris to the Lycée.”
Lewis hereupon made some remarks about English and French schools, and upon the education of
      Boris Elaguine; but slowly and dexterously he made the conversation return to Sacha and
      Hamlin; he made the conspicuous matter no longer the object of Madame Elaguine’s and Hamlin’s
      journey to Paris, but the journey itself.
“I don’t think Madame Elaguine’s Russian relations—her aunt who lives in Paris and Boris’s
      grandfather—will be particularly pleased at her going about like that with a young man,” he
      said. “Russians are such corrupt people, they see mischief in everything.”
Anne understood. Edmund Lewis, who always hated her, had been unable to resist the
      temptation, now that both Hamlin and Sacha were safe out of the way, of seeing the proud Miss
      Brown wince beneath his compassion. He was artistically playing upon the feelings of
      humiliation and anger with which he imagined her to be filled.
“Madame Elaguine is Mr Hamlin’s cousin, you must remember,” answered Anne, quietly bending
      over her embroidery.
“True; but the people who meet them in Paris won’t know that, or won’t believe it. Besides,
      it’s not as if they had always lived together and been as brother and sister, as some cousins
      have. I think Madame Elaguine is very rash to run the risk of unnecessary gossip; and I must
      say I can’t understand Hamlin being so dense as not to see that he was compromising his
      cousin, especially as people were beginning to notice his assiduity to his cousin even here.
      Of course, however,” added Lewis, fixing his eyes on Miss Brown,
       “being engaged, to you makes a difference to Hamlin. A man
      who is engaged to be married may, I suppose, go about with any woman—it is as if he were
      married. I am very sorry I shall be far away, somewhere in Central Asia or South America—I
      don’t know where—when your marriage will come off, Miss Brown. I must make my congratulations
      betimes.”
“There is nothing to congratulate about,” answered Anne, quietly; “there has been no
      question of my marrying Mr Hamlin. I am sorry such an idea should have got abroad. I was, you
      know, Mr Hamlin’s ward till lately, and I am now taking advantage of his aunt’s kindness to
      stay here till—till I settle what I am going to do; I may be going to Girton—I don’t
      know.”
“Oh, indeed!” exclaimed Lewis; “pray forgive my unintentional impertinence then. Girton?
      Ah—How long do you intend remaining there?”
“I don’t know. Nothing is settled yet.”
       Anne was determined not to let this man enjoy his
      impertinence and spitefulness: he should go away baffled.
“I may stay there altogether. I should rather like to be a teacher.”
“And I,” said Lewis, with one of his would‐be fascinating smiles, “would, in that case, like
      to be a pupil, Miss Brown.”
Anne did not answer. He must be disappointed, she thought. But he was determined to get some
      satisfaction out of her.
“I can’t get over Hamlin’s thoughtlessness in accompanying Madame Elaguine to Paris,” he
      said. “It would have been so simple to ask some lady to be of the party. I suppose you did not
      like leaving Mrs Macgregor? I was sorry to hear that she was ailing.”
“There was no question of my going,” answered Anne; “and I do think it is such silly
      nonsense about any one being required. If people choose to think that Mr Hamlin is going to
      marry his cousin—well, why not? It would be a very natural thing if he did.”
She looked Lewis boldly in the face. It was the first time that she had said the thing which
      she believed, hoped for, prayed for.
Edmund Lewis was evidently staggered; and Anne enjoyed watching his discomfiture. But a
      thought soon came into his subtle head.
“I suppose you see a good deal of Mr Richard Brown?” he asked; “he’s an extraordinarily
      clever man.”
“Yes; he is very able. I see him often enough. At present his electioneering business
      doesn’t leave him much time.”
“Ah, to be sure. It costs a lot of money, doesn’t it, to get into Parliament? But I suppose
      Mr Brown is rich now, is he not?”
“He is well off.”
“And he is sure to succeed. He has a fine career before him,” mused Lewis. He had, as he
      thought, grasped the situation: there had been an amicable exchange—Anne was to marry Richard
      Brown, and Sacha was to have Hamlin. All his enemies—for Sacha and Hamlin had evidently sent
      him to the right-about
      —were going to be happily settled. His paste‐coloured face
      grew pastier than ever; he bit his scarlet lips and auburn moustache; he looked horribly angry
      and malignant; wickeder than even Anne, who had always hated him, would have believed it
      possible.
But he kept his temper—nay, he was quite unusually deferential and sweet. He led the
      conversation to other topics; and Anne thought that his only object was now to talk no more
      about the affairs which he had so misjudged, when, she scarcely knew how, he began to talk
      about Wotton Hall—first about the scenery, then about the grounds, then the house, then their
      stay there, and finally about the incident of the burning bed.
He went over all the circumstances of it; he summed up all that he and Anne knew of Madame
      Elaguine’s persecution; and then, as if discussing a curious psychological problem, he asked
      her whether it had ever occurred to her that there was any possibility that the persecution
      should be a fraud, and that the bed
       had been set fire to by Madame Elaguine herself. “I don’t
      know whether you remarked at the time, that the flames burst out just two minutes after Madame
      Elaguine had fetched the cigarette‐papers out of her room, and that she had given orders to
      her maid not to come until she should be rung for,” said Lewis; “also, that Madame Elaguine
      seemed extremely unwilling that any inquiry should be made into the matter afterwards.”
Anne said nothing; the recollection of the precious lace‐trimmed dressing‐gown, placed
      carefully out of the way of the flames, and of that sentence, “And they never forgot, so long
      as they lived, that terrible burning bed,” which had caught her eye in little Hélène
      Elaguine’s story‐book, came into her mind. She had put that matter of the persecution behind
      her of late, and yet in her heart she felt that she believed it to be a fraud.
“I have had my doubts about it,” bending over her work lest Lewis should see her face.
      “Indeed,” she added boldly, indignant at her
       own want of frankness, “I am inclined to believe that
      Madame Elaguine did set that bed on fire. Several things have made me think so.”
Lewis smiled. “I am glad to find that you take my view of the case, Miss Brown. The chemist
      at Appledore—where, if you remember, Madame Elaguine went for some shopping the day before the
      fire—showed me himself the bottle of acid from which he had helped Madame Elaguine—I forget
      the name of the stuff—she said she wanted some to take spots out of a dress.”
“Indeed,” went on Lewis, “I think that we have in Madame Elaguine a very curious instance of
      a sort of monomania which has, I believe, its scientific name,”—and Lewis began to retail a
      variety of instances, culled out of some volume of ‘Causes célèbres,’ of persons who had
      elaborately made up persecutions of which themselves were victims. He had always been fond of
      talking as if he knew a great deal about morbid conditions of the brain, and, indeed, morbid
      things of all sorts; and he
       talked for some time as if he took a purely abstract
      interest in the case.
“One is apt to meet very singular types among Russian women, especially such as have led a
      wandering life like Madame Elaguine,” went on Lewis. “They are devoured by a passion for the
      forbidden, or at least for the unreal and theatrical; there is something strangely crooked in
      their moral vision, something discordant in their nature. They are extraordinary, charming,
      intelligent, depraved creatures. Only a Russian woman could be at once so childish and so
      theatrical and insincere, so full of idealism and of cynicism, as Madame Elaguine. Ah, she is
      a wonderful being! That matter of the burning bed finishes her off perfectly.”
Edmund Lewis fixed his green magnetic eyes on Anne. He still believed that she must hate
      Sacha, as it was clear that, for some reason or other, he hated the Russian; and he wished, by
      giving Miss Brown these notions about Madame Elaguine, to induce
       her to revenge herself and him. But Anne had become quite
      dense to his intentions. She did not connect these ideas with Lewis; his words seemed to her
      now the mere expression of all the things which her own instinct had revealed, and which she
      had put behind her in her desire that Sacha should relieve her of the intolerable debt to
      Hamlin. The creature described by this odious man was the real Sacha; she was Madame Elaguine
      as she now clearly appeared to Miss Brown. And yet how unjust! Lewis had wanted to torment her
      by making her jealous of Madame Elaguine; he now wished to pay off Madame Elaguine for having,
      in some manner, slighted his own vanity.
“I think you take a dreadful view of the matter,” she said; “you explain Madame Elaguine,
      who is only half a Russian, by all the horrible Russians you have ever met or imagined. I
      think there is a much simpler explanation. Madame Elaguine has been very strangely brought up;
      she has lived with very bad people; her husband was a
       horrible wretch, we all know. She is excessively
      hysterical—her mother, Mr Hamlin’s aunt, was so also—and we all know that the desire to be
      prominent, to deceive, is a common form of hysteria. And as she has never been brought up to
      restrain herself, she imagines herself to be persecuted, and makes up the persecution. She is
      much more to be pitied than to be blamed.”
Anne spoke rapidly. She seemed to be speaking fairly; and yet she knew she was wilfully
      misrepresenting, that Madame Elaguine was something more than a hysterical monomaniac: she
      remembered Mrs Macgregor’s stories of Sacha’s degraded childhood, all the accusations of her
      precocious lying and unchasteness, of her having led one of her cousins into mischief, and set
      the house by the ears. She was indignant with herself for defending this woman—out of charity?
      out of conviction? No. But merely because she required that this woman be sufficiently
      innocent to become Hamlin’s wife.
Edmund Lewis stroked his auburn beard meditatively.
“I don’t believe in praise and blame,” he answered; “I believe merely in fate. Some people
      are born noble, truthful, chaste—others just the reverse. It is the fault of neither; and
      each, in its way, is equally interesting and valuable to the artist or the psychologist. The
      curious thing about Madame Elaguine is, that she apparently stands half‐way; she is, according
      to the ideas of the world, half responsible and half irresponsible. We see in her a hysterical
      woman, troubled by a morbid love of deceit; and at the same time a woman to whom such deceit
      is or has been practically necessary. Madame Elaguine continues for her amusement, and
      develops to the utmost, an imaginary persecution, whose origin must be sought in some intrigue
      which it was her interest to veil by a mystification,” Lewis drawled on in his omniscient,
      half‐pedantic way, as if the intrigues of married women were the most usual subject of
       conversation between a man and a young lady, and as if to
      suggest that Madame Elaguine had led a loose life were the most obvious and inoffensive of
      proceedings.
Miss Brown blushed crimson; but she felt something more than insulted, something more than
      indignant. What right had this man to focus all her own suspicions concerning a woman whom she
      fervently wished not to suspect?
“Mr Lewis,” she said, “I don’t think those things should be listened to by me or said by
      you. I believe that Madame Elaguine is not sound in her mind, and that her persecution is a
      hoax; but I believe that she is an honest woman in other respects. She is a friend of mine,
      and I will not hear her slandered.”
“Heaven forbid that I should wish to slander her! I think she is a fascinating woman; and
      she is—at least she was—quite as great a friend of mine as of yours. I was only telling you
      how I explain her character.”
Lewis had always appeared a reptile in
       Anne’s eyes; but never so much as just now.
“I hate scandal,” he said, taking his hat, “and I am most grieved to have appeared to be
      talking scandal. People always misunderstand the sort of passionate interest I take in every
      kind of curious character. I suppose you would call it morbid, Miss Brown; but I really was
      considering Madame Elaguine merely as an interesting study.”
All this kind of talk, of which Hamlin was so fond, perfectly sickened Anne; and the sudden
      stirring up of all her old suspicions was exasperating.
“That is all very fine,” she said angrily; “but do you, or do you not, believe Madame
      Elaguine to be a dishonourable woman, apart from this monomania?”
“It is very hard to say. You know I disbelieve in what you call moral responsibilities. I
      imagine Madame Elaguine to have found her mania for persecution very convenient at one period
      of her life—yes, certainly
      . I think it is the only rational way to account for the
      beginning of it—don’t you?”
Miss Brown took no notice of Lewis’s insolent inquisitiveness of manner.
“If you think that, Mr Lewis,” she said, “may I ask how you reconciled with your notions of
      gentlemanly behaviour the calm way in which you let Mr Hamlin introduce such a woman as you
      describe to me, and let me continue to know her? No; you are perfectly aware that all this is
      merely trumped up at the moment.” And she put her hand on the bell‐handle, for the door to be
      opened to Lewis.
Edmund Lewis smiled.
“Walter Hamlin’s eyes are quite as good as mine. As regards my behaviour towards you, I
      cannot go into details, but you may understand, dear Miss Brown, that two or three months ago
      I may not, as a man of honour, have been at liberty to discuss Madame Elaguine’s character in
      the way that I
       have done now that Madame Elaguine’s relations with me have
      entirely changed their nature. Good‐bye, dear Miss Brown. I am most truly grieved if I have
      offended you in any way.”
Anne merely made an impatient gesture, a gesture almost of disgust, as Edmund Lewis left the
      room.
So this was the explanation of Edmund Lewis’s apparent disgrace! Sacha Elaguine had repelled
      his odious advances, she had closed her door to him, she had complained to Hamlin; and now, as
      soon as their backs were turned, Lewis had come to slander them without fear of a
      horsewhipping. Anne seemed to breathe once more—thank heaven that the wretch had overreached
      himself in his malice!
THE door had scarcely closed upon Edmund Lewis, when it opened again suddenly.
“Mr Perry!” cried Anne, rising and running forward as a child might run to meet a former
      kind and encouraging teacher; “Mr Perry! oh I am so glad to see you!”
It really seemed to her that this dear, good, open familiar face, with the untidy yellow
      hair and beard,—that this well‐known, boyish, slouching figure drove away like some cabalistic
      sign the loathsome creature who had been there a few minutes before,—that Melton Perry
      dispelled all the horrid vision left behind by Edmund Lewis.
“Didn’t expect me yet, eh, Annie—I mean Miss Brown?” said Melton Perry, as she
       seized his hand in both hers. “I suppose you expected me by
      the Dover train. But I came by Dieppe, six hours’ agony, but a saving of twelve‐and‐sixpence.
      I was always an economical creature, wasn’t I? Why, what’s that you have round your neck? That
      beastly little pewter and horn rosary that I got you at the Fair of the Impruneta, by George!
      Fancy your having kept such a thing!”
“It’s one of the best things I have,” said Anne, the tears coming into her eyes as this
      well‐known voice brought back the far‐distant past—“it’s the present of a friend.”
“And all this, isn’t this also the present of a friend?” said Perry, throwing himself into
      an arm‐chair, and looking round the room with much the same wonder with which Anne had looked
      at its strange furniture, its brocades and embroideries, and Japanese vases and lustre plates,
      when she first came; “but I forgot, Walter Hamlin isn’t a particular friend of yours.”
To this jest Miss Brown made no answer:
       if only Melton Perry could guess at the literal truth of
      his words!
“Lord, what a damned gorgeous place this is!” cried Perry, still looking round; and then,
      suddenly turning towards Anne, where she sat, in a wonderful trailing dress of deep crimson
      stamped velvet, a big bunch of blackish crimson roses marking off, throwing into relief, the
      strange opaque ivory of her face, “what a beautiful woman you are, Annie! Do you know, I
      usen’t to believe it, when Watty raved about you at the Villa Arnolfini. What a crusty old
      jackass I must have been! But tell, why in the wide world aren’t you married yet? What have
      you been doing all this time?”
“Mr Hamlin has not asked me to marry him yet,” answered Anne, laconically.
Melton Perry thrust his hands upon the arms of his chair, and his whole body forward. “Not
      asked you to marry him yet!” he repeated; “do you mean to say you aren’t engaged to him . .
      .?”
Anne shook her head.
“That he’s been going loafing, and spooning, and doing Vita Nuova all this
      time? I thought that he must have lost two dozen grandfathers and grandmothers in rapid
      succession, so that one mourning postponed your marriage after the other, or something
      similar.” Then a thought suddenly struck him. “Hamlin’s not ill?” he cried. “Consumption,
      madness, doctors’ consultations,—anything of that sort?”
Miss Brown could not help smiling.
“Oh no, Mr Hamlin has been quite well. He is in Paris at present; he didn’t expect you quite
      so soon, but he will be back in a day or two.”
Melton Perry rose and looked Anne very earnestly in the face—
“Miss Brown—no, I can’t call you Miss Brown—Annie, tell me the truth. Has Hamlin not kept
      his word—has he played you any dirty trick? No, no, I don’t mean anything,—but, has Hamlin
      played fast and loose with you?”
“Mr Hamlin never intended asking me to marry him at once,” answered Anne, evasively. She
      felt in Melton Perry’s suspicions that again, as with her cousin, Hamlin would be attacked,
      maligned, that she would have to defend him. “Don’t you remember, Mr Perry? We were to wait,
      to see whether we really . . . I will tell you all about it later—to‐morrow. It is a long
      story; I want to hear about you now, about Italy—about your work, the children, Mrs
      Perry.”
“Mr Hamlin,” she added, fearing lest her evasive answers, her haste to get rid of the
      subject, should prejudice Perry against his friend, “has been most generous and noble towards
      me; indeed much more than I can ever say.”
“I’m damned if I understand any of it,” said Perry to himself, as he proceeded to answer
      Anne’s rapid strings of questions about his wife, his little girls, his pictures, his
      etchings,—those etchings, never thought of before, which had revealed in this sixth‐rate
      painter
       a great artist, and had brought him, in good case to make
      money, to England. Miss Brown insisted upon showing him up to his room herself. As she was
      leaving him, he looked at her long and seriously.
“Annie,” he said, “if it’s not rude to ask, for I’ve forgotten—how old are you?”
“I was twenty‐four last month. Why do you ask? Do you think I look more?”—she added, with a
      smile whose bitterness he did not catch. She could scarcely realise it herself; she seemed to
      have lived so long, such years and years since she had seen him last—nay, since she had first
      entered this room.
“Twenty‐four,” repeated Perry, stupidly. “Well now, don’t be offended—of course you couldn’t
      be more, for you weren’t of age when you left us; but somehow—it isn’t that you don’t look
      young, you know, but all the same I should have thought . . . I’m a rude brute.”
“That I was much older,” laughed Miss Brown. “Well, I often think so myself.”
“It’s something, I don’t know what. You are far handsomer than in Italy, and you never did
      look much like a girl—you know what I mean; but now, upon my word, I don’t know how to say it,
      I never saw an unmarried woman look like you. You look as if you had seen and understood such
      a heap of things. I feel quite a fool before you. Forgive me,” he said, “I’m always a
      blundering tomfool. I had somehow thought of you as something like my own girls. Winnie’s
      sixteen, you know, and such a strapping girl. But I feel as if you might be my
      grandmother.”
Anne laughed. “I have always felt as if I were your grandmother. I was born old. Good‐bye,
      Mr Perry. Remember that dinner is at seven; and put on a dress‐coat if you want to win the
      heart of my aunt—I mean Mr Hamlin’s aunt.”
Melton Perry whistled as he stooped to unbuckle his portmanteau.
“I’m damned if I understand anything of it all, and Annie least of any of them,” he
      mused.
“AFTER all,” said Melton Perry to himself next morning, as he sat under the big
      apple‐trees in the garden, smoking his pipe and looking at Miss Brown stitching at a piece of
      embroidery and overwhelming him with questions about Winnie, Mildred, Leila, the baby, Mrs
      Perry—nay, even about all her former fellow‐servants in Italy, and the grocer round the
      corner, and the milkman, and the man who came from the country every Monday to fetch the
      linen,—“after all, it was a very bright idea of old Watty’s to fall in love with our nursemaid
      and turn her into a wonderful æsthetic being in a wonderful æsthetic house: it was very
      sensible of Mrs Perry to encourage him in the idea; and it was just like
       a confounded, fumbling, purblind old pig and ass like me to
      try and prevent it.”
After lunch Anne took Melton Perry up into the drawing‐room, cool, and almost Italian, with
      drawn blinds and a faint smell of flowers in the dusk, on one of the most stifling London
      afternoons. Perry mechanically took out a cigarette; but he hastily put it in again. It seemed
      to him profanation to smoke in such a wonderful room, in the presence of such a wonderful
      woman.
“Please smoke; you used always to smoke after lunch with Mrs Perry,” said Anne.
“But—this isn’t Florence; and you—you aren’t Mrs Perry.”
Anne made an impatient gesture that he should take out his cigarettes again. She had
      determined that she must speak to him before Hamlin came; that she must try and get him to
      understand, to explain things to Hamlin. But how get this good‐natured, kindly, childish, yet
      in a way chivalrous, harum‐scarum creature to understand her story? She
       had a great dread of the impossibility of making him
      understand that Hamlin had never acted meanly towards her—that their estrangement was due to
      nothing voluntary on Hamlin’s part, to nothing but the disappointing of her own perhaps
      unwarranted ideals; of making him understand that Hamlin’s connection with Madame Elaguine,
      instead of being a grievance in her eyes, was the greatest happiness she could conceive. Perry
      was sure to burst out against Hamlin, to refuse to listen to her explanations, to insist upon
      fighting the battle of an injured woman.
Anne groaned at the thought, as she might have groaned at some immense stone to roll uphill.
      It was always so difficult for her to understand others, so intolerably more difficult to make
      herself understood. But she had resolved.
“I must tell you all my history since last we saw each other,” she said; “you will want to
      hear it, won’t you, Mr Perry?”
Perry, to whose brain all the unwonted
       splendour of this house, all the fantasticalness of finding
      his former nursemaid changed into a magnificently dressed goddess, had gone with a sort of
      narcotic effect, answered in a stupefied way, “Oh dear, yes—of course—I’m dying to hear it. I
      can’t at all realise that it is really you, Annie, or really anybody and anything. Do you
      remember when we went into Lucca that day for the feast of the Holy Face, and I left you with
      Winnie and Mildred to go to the opera with Hamlin? D’you remember the plaster bust of
      Castruccio at the top of the hotel stairs, with the old woman’s night‐cap on? I don’t know why
      that bust haunted me so. What tiny trots Winnie and Mildred were, with sashes down at their
      knees! and such confounded young flirts, five feet seven, as they are now! I see you have
      Winnie’s photograph. How comic those brats must have looked! . . . But won’t you tell me all
      your marvellous and incredible circumstances?”
“I scarcely know where to begin; perhaps
       I had better begin at the end. You wanted to know,” said
      Anne, making a great effort to arrest Perry’s attention, “why Mr Hamlin and I weren’t married
      yet, nor even engaged . . .”
“Oh yes; what the deuce is the meaning of it, Annie? You are certainly the queerest people,
      you æsthetic folk. By Jove! you actually have a photograph of yourself with the children. I
      had clean forgotten its existence; and now I remember as if it were yesterday taking you to
      Alinari’s, and how beastly naughty Winnie was! Oh, what a sulky blackamoor you do look, Annie!
      Good gracious! you don’t mean to say you know her?” and Melton Perry suddenly
      turned the album, at which he was looking, towards Anne. “Where in the world did you pick up a
      photograph of Mrs Constantine Bulzo?”
“Mrs Constantine Bulzo ?” asked Anne, in amazement. “Whom do you mean? I never heard of such
      a person. That photograph?—why, that’s a half‐Russian cousin of Mr Hamlin's
      , Sacha Elaguine, who was a Miss Polozoff.”
“Hamlin’s cousin!” whistled Melton Perry,—“well, upon my word . . . yes, of course, I had
      forgotten—of course, her name isn’t Mrs Constantine Bulzo any longer. But may I ask, how under
      heaven do you come to know Madame Elaguine?”
“I don’t understand a word. This lady is Madame Elaguine; she is Mr Hamlin’s first cousin,
      and that’s of course how I come to know her.”
“Hamlin’s cousin or not Hamlin’s cousin, how in the wide world could a woman like you ever
      know, ever meet such a—such a—excuse the word, but it’s the least bad I can find—such an
      abominable baggage as this woman, Elaguine, or Bulzo, or Polozoff—as this abominable
      Sacha?”
Miss Brown turned white and almost green; the embroidery slipped out of her hands—she
      gasped.
“Good Lord, what’s the matter with you,
       Annie?” cried Perry, jumping up; “you surely didn’t imagine
      that—you surely can’t be a great friend of such a creature as that. What’s the matter?—are you
      ill?”
“It’s nothing—the heat, I suppose,” said Anne, stooping to pick up her embroidery; “and
      then, also, I suppose I’m not very strong yet; I’ve had brain fever, and you took me by
      surprise. But I oughtn’t to have been surprised, because I know Sacha Elaguine has a great
      many enemies, and that her circumstances, her history, and in some measure, unfortunately, her
      ways and character, rather lend themselves to all manner of horrible stories. She’s a
      frightfully tried and slandered little woman, poor thing. But I don’t—I don’t believe any of
      it.”
Anne was conscious of a horrible effort as she spoke these words; lying was difficult to
      her; and she remembered Edmund Lewis’s words.
“Are you really fond of Madame Bulzo—I mean Madame Elaguine?” asked Perry, grown
       very serious suddenly, and looking Anne in the face with an
      expression of surprise and pain. “Are you intimate with her?”
“I am intimate in the sense of having been with her a good deal, and knowing more than other
      people about her,” answered Anne; “but I can’t say I am a great friend of hers. She is Mr
      Hamlin’s cousin; she has settled in England recently; he—we, I mean—see a good deal of her. I
      am awfully sorry for her, poor little woman; but there isn’t very much in common between
      us.”
“Thank goodness!” cried Perry. “Do you know, the sight of that photograph made me feel quite
      sick—the thought that you, Annie, should be the friend of such a creature. But I knew you
      couldn’t be.”
“But I am Madame Elaguine’s friend; I don’t believe a word of the infamous stories that are
      told about her; and you wouldn’t believe them either, if you knew all that I do.”
“What do you know ?” asked Perry, slowly
       and pityingly; “about the iniquities of Monsieur Elaguine,
      about the terrible persecution, the bits of letters, the pistol‐shots, the poisoned chocolate,
      the lit spirits of wine poured under the door,—all that crazy imposture, I suppose? Well, I
      hope that Hamlin knows no more than you; otherwise, by God! he’s no better than a blackguard
      to let you associate with this woman, be she his cousin a hundred times over; and you must
      never see that woman again, Annie. I forbid you to—I, as the oldest friend you have in the
      world—I forbid you to defile yourself by knowing that infamous creature.” And Perry walked
      fiercely up and down, while Miss Brown, her whole body, it seemed to her, melting away from
      her soul, sat speechless looking at him.
“Listen to me, Anne,” he said, “and judge whether I am unfair. God knows I’m not a Puritan,
      neither towards myself nor towards others. I’ve been a very rowdy man; I’ve knowu a great many
      rowdy women—what you call regular bad women—Russians, who are the
       worst of all—by the dozen. I’m not a red‐tapist; I can
      quite understand women misbehaving,—having lovers—that sort of thing,—or even, if they are
      very wretched, selling themselves. It’s beastly immoral to say so before a woman, but still,
      there it is, it’s the truth. Well, such as you see me, I wouldn’t touch that
      woman with the longest pair of tongs in all the devil’s kitchen. That woman is really
      wicked—not merely immoral, but abominable, atrocious; she is the sort of woman who absolutely
      degrades a man, takes a pleasure in turning him into a beast and a madman—whose greatest
      pleasure would be to degrade and make a beast of an honest woman. Just listen to me. Some five
      years ago I knew a Greek couple—a young man and his sister, called Constantine and Marie
      Bulzo. They were orphans, very young, very handsome, especially the boy, who was only eighteen
      or nineteen. They were a sort of half‐English Greeks, and went in for being æsthetical and
      artistic, all that sort of thing. I knew them in Florence, where Miss Bulzo,
       who was four or five years older than her brother, was
      studying painting. I gave them both lessons. I never met two such beautiful creatures, body
      and soul, as those young Bulzos. They were like young saints, and yet perfectly childish and
      merry, and they were quite devoted to each other: Marie really lived only for the boy. Well,
      six months later I met the two at Venice. They were staying at the same hotel as your Madame
      Elaguine, who immediately proceeded to make herself awfully fascinating and pathetic to them.
      Of course the poor children swallowed all about the persecutions by the Nihilists as so much
      Gospel. They introduced me, and Madame Elaguine rather amused me; but I saw very soon that she
      wasn’t a woman for them to know. There was a man staying in the same hotel, an old friend of
      hers, and, in fact, her lover, who was one of the vilest scoundrels the world ever bred—a
      horrible loathsome old Russian. I used to wonder how Madame Elaguine could endure him, but
      then I found out that he paid
       her bills for her. I tried to warn the Bulzos, especially
      Constantine, as, being a man, he might be expected to understand such things rather better.
      But, figurati! (and Perry made an expressive gesture of
      Italian exaggeration,) they wouldn’t hear a word against their beloved, deeply injured,
      martyrised Madame Elaguine. Well, we half quarrelled; I scarcely saw anything of them. At the
      end of four months what do I hear, but that Miss Bulzo was married to Madame Elaguine’s
      loathsome Russian; and then, a week later, I see Constantine and Madame Elaguine go off in the
      train together. Do you understand? Madame Elaguine, who was in love with young Bulzo, wanted
      to go off with him, and not knowing what to do with Marie, and wishing to dismiss and settle
      accounts with her quondam lover, had, in some fiendish way,
      induced this innocent girl of twenty‐four to marry this frightful old Russian sinner—had sold
      her to the loathsome beast as a settlement to their debts; and Marie, after a few months,
      simply pined
       away and died of shame and disgust at the slavery she had
      been sold into. Do you understand that?”
“I understand; but I don’t see why I should believe—it’s too horrible to be true.”
“It is true, though, for Constantine Bulzo told it me all himself later; how the Elaguine
      had talked him over to consent, and had regularly bullied his sister into the marriage, by
      pretending that it was the only way of paying a lot of imaginary debts of her brother’s, and
      had forced Constantine, who was raving in love with her, to hold his tongue. That was the end
      of Marie Bulzo. Now as to Constantine. His sister once safely married to her old beast, he
      went off with the Elaguine, or rather, the Elaguine went off with him. Next summer I met them
      at Perugia; they were travelling about in remote places as Mr and Mrs Bulzo; and English
      people were so kind as to believe that this Russian woman of thirty and this Greek boy of
      twenty were married. Constantine perfectly adored her; but I never
       saw a man more changed: he looked thirty, a miserable,
      hang‐dog, effeminate sort of creature, quite unable to do anything except drag after his
      so‐called wife. That woman had regularly ruined the poor boy, broken his spirit, turned him
      into a kind of male odalisque of hers. Two years later the Bulzos were at Venice again; and I
      came just in time for the catastrophe. One fine morning Mrs Constantine Bulzo, become Madame
      Elaguine once more, packed her trunks and went off with a French painter, leaving her supposed
      husband to pay the hotel bill.”
“I saw Constantine shortly after; the woman had spent nearly all his money, and he was
      living, or starving, in a room in a beastly court, slinking out only early in the morning and
      late at night, spending the day lying in his bed, eating opium and drinking. I never saw such
      a wreck in my life. As he was starving, I got him a place as clerk at a picture‐shop, and
      tried to get him to work; but he didn’t seem to care about living, and went on drinking and
       stupefying himself, till one day he drowned himself in the
      lagoon—they say accidentally, but I shall never believe it. That is the story of your Madame
      Elaguine; and I swear to you I have not exaggerated one word of it. Do you still think she is
      a woman fit to be known by you? By heaven! when I think what that miserable boy was when I saw
      him last, and what he had been when first I knew him, I feel as if it would be the greatest
      possible pleasure to throttle your Madame Elaguine with my own hands! Upon my soul, I do!”
Perry was walking up and down rapidly. Anne had never seen him so excited in his life.
“But,” remarked Miss Brown, coldly, “even admitting your story to be true, which I suppose,
      as it comes from you, that I must, was it all the woman’s fault? You men always throw the
      blame on the woman. But your Constantine Bulzo must have been a wretched weak creature.”
Perry stopped short.
“No one has a right to expect every man or every woman to be very strong,” he answered,
      sadly. “This poor boy was kind and trusting, and, when left to his own devices, honest. He was
      not weaker than most men, especially than most artistic natures—not weaker, for instance, than
      Walter Hamlin.”
Anne Brown did not answer. But next morning she greatly surprised Melton Perry by asking
      him, in a voice that affected him as being very strange—
“Did you tell me something—a dreadful story—about Madame Elaguine and a young Greek friend
      of yours, yesterday afternoon?”
Perry looked at her with surprise. There was something in her wide‐opened, strained eyes, in
      her rigidity of features, that made him think of a sleep‐walker.
“Of course I did. Why?”
“Oh, nothing. I had only a very bad night—all manner of horrible dreams, and I was not sure
      whether this might not be one of them.”
“DO you know, Annie,” said Melton Perry, two or three days later, “I find Watty
      very much altered. He seems so fearfully depressed and broken‐spirited. He used always to be
      bored, but not like this; he has got to look so old, with those great rings under his
      eyes.”
Miss Brown did not answer. Hamlin had returned the previous evening from Paris, and she also
      had noticed that he was changed—not so much, indeed, as Melton Perry seemed to think, for
      Melton Perry had not seen him for four or five years; and she—she had watched a change coming
      over him during the last months. Yet even she must own to herself that this change had made
      rapid progress during his fortnight or three weeks in Paris, or at least that this absence
       enabled her to notice the change much more. He was even
      more than usually apathetic and silent, and his pleasure at seeing his old friend once more
      was so slight, or rather so tempered by a kind of indifference and even annoyance, that Miss
      Brown felt perfectly nervous lest poor warm‐hearted Melton Perry should feel mortally wounded.
      The next day Hamlin made an effort over himself: he seemed anxious to be as kind as possible
      to Perry; but somehow it did not succeed. Melton Perry would have liked, as he said, to have
      Walter all to himself, to sit with him by the hour together, or walk out alone with him,
      talking of old times; but Hamlin seemed possessed by a nervous dread of a tête‐à‐tête. He could not sit in the studio with Perry for more than
      half an hour without, on some excuse or other, calling his aunt or Miss Brown. He seemed to
      have invited a lot of people to drop in at all hours, as if to protect him from his old
      friend.
“It’s awfully good of old Hamlin to wish me to know all these grand swell painters and
       newspaper writers,” said Perry to Anne, in the tone of a
      disappointed child; “and I suppose it is very useful to me. But still, I wish I
      could get him to understand that what I want at present is to see just him and you; that all
      these confounded influential people will keep; and that I’d rather have a good talk over a
      pipe with him alone, as in old days.”
Anne did not answer. It seemed to her that she understood so well why Hamlin dreaded a
       tête‐à‐tête with Melton Perry; a tête‐à‐t;ête which would be, largely, a talk about the past and the future, about
      her, Anne Brown. But Anne could not think about poor Perry and his disappointed friendliness;
      her whole nature seemed to be staggering and reeling, and the concerns of other folk were as
      distant, as unattainable, as they might be to a person tossed for hours on a stormy sea,
      paralysed, removed as it were from the world by an unspeakable sense of nausea. The days
      seemed to reel past, and yet not a week was gone since the arrival of Melton Perry.
One afternoon, they were seated—Hamlin,
       Perry, and she—with Mrs Macgregor at tea in the dim,
      shuttered drawing‐room, with the heavy scent of flowers, when Richard Brown was announced. If
      a ghost had appeared on the threshold, Anne could not have turned paler, and trembled harder
      in all her limbs—this man, whom she had seen but a week ago, seemed indeed a spectre out of
      the past, the long dead past, with which all connection was severed. It was an immense relief
      to her not to be alone; she had an instinct that Richard had come to ask her whether, at last,
      she had settled matters with Hamlin; she thought she could see his eyes going from Hamlin’s
      face to her own inquiringly. The conversation was languid and indifferent. Richard Brown
      wished for an explanation from her; Melton Perry hoped for an explanation from Richard Brown;
      Hamlin looked on passively, with that half‐stupefied look which she had noticed in him
      lately.
Hamlin was more than merely depressed, he was very sad; his face, so handsome and still so
      young, so perfectly unmarked in feature,
       contrasted strikingly with the pleased, happy‐go‐lucky,
      kindly face of Perry; with the strong, eager, contemptuous face of Brown. For a moment Anne
      wondered what this sadness meant; whether there was in him any recollection of what he was, of
      what he might be; whether the poet, the dreamer, the chivalrous Hamlin of former days, still
      existed and suffered within this weak and degraded Hamlin of the present; and then, suddenly,
      this thought came in violent contact with the remembrance of Perry’s story of Constantine
      Bulzo. Had Constantine Bulzo looked like that?
Richard Brown, obviously disappointed in his visit, rose.
“Why are you going so soon, Brown ?” asked Hamlin, rising and making an effort over himself;
      “you never give me a chance of seeing you. Won’t you stay to dinner? It is very impertinent of
      me to invite people in a house that isn’t mine; but I feel sure Miss Brown is disappointed in
      not having had any talk with you. Chough is coming to see Perry
       this evening, so you and your cousin might have a chat
      after dinner.”
He spoke simply, in his quiet, subdued, melancholy voice. Richard Brown looked at him
      rapidly from head to foot; what was the meaning of this? And Anne felt herself growing very
      red. Had Hamlin guessed what she scarcely herself knew?
“Thank you,” answered Richard; “I am dining with some of my would‐be constituents to‐night.
      You know,” he said to Anne, “I am going into Parliament, I believe. I will return soon; many
      thanks, Mr Hamlin.”
“I have a good many things to tell you, Nan,” he said, as Miss Brown accompanied him to the
      room‐door. “I have heard of a scholarship which I am sure you could take if you would cram for
      six months; and I want to ask you a lot of things also. I will come back in two or three days.
      Good‐bye.”
He squeezed her hand; and Anne felt her heart thump at that hand‐squeeze, so frank and
      affectionate.
“Good‐bye, Cousin Dick,” she said. Her voice and eyes and hand lingered in that farewell, in
      a way quite unusual to her reserved and decided nature. She was saying goodbye she knew not
      exactly to what, but she felt that the farewell was the last, and that it meant farewell to
      her happiness.
Chough came to dinner and stayed during the evening.
When he and Hamlin had taken their departure, Perry remained for a few moments standing by
      the open window, looking vacantly at the trees, the outlines of the craft moored opposite, the
      long trails of moonlight on the water. Then he came back into the room, and began fiddling
      with some roses in a glass.
“Beautiful roses,” he said, in an awkward drawl; “we have none like them in Italy. Why don’t
      Italians cultivate flowers? What do you call this? Is it a La France? I never knew a turnip
      from a jasmine.”
“I think it is a La France; I don’t know,” answered Anne, taking a candlestick off the
       dining‐room mantelpiece. “I think I must leave you now. You
      will find a box of cigarettes on the sideboard. Forgive me, I feel so tired and stupid.”
“One moment!” cried Perry. “It’s a very disagreeable thing I have to say, Annie; but I think
      I ought to say it. I guessed it the second time I saw him already; but now I am quite sure of
      it—Hamlin drinks.”
Anne did not answer.
“I don’t mean to say that he gets drunk. But he drinks—spirits; I’ve seen him to‐night after
      dinner, and I’m sure he’s going to take more at home. There’s no mistaking the look. It isn’t
      that he takes much, not more than I or most men might take; but it is that he oughtn’t to take
      any. He used, you know, never even to take wine, except with gallons of water. He can’t take
      anything of the sort. I remember already when we were at college together, Watty was a
      teetotaller. It appears some people are like that; I’ve heard doctors say that it’s not
      unusual in families where
       there has been much drinking: it’s a sort of diseased
      sensitiveness to alcohol—it becomes a kind of poison. You know that Hamlin’s father drank, and
      one of his uncles died of drink, and his brother is either dead or dying, somewhere in a
       maison de santé, of a sort of mixed delirium tremens and craziness. It’s a thing,” went on Perry, keeping his eyes
      fixed on the pattern of the Persian rug under his feet, “which grieves and alarms me horribly;
      and in which I feel that you are probably the only person who could have any influence with
      him. It’s useless my speaking. He must have got in among a bad lot. That little Chough seems
      harmless enough;but I hear that he was very close with a nasty fellow called Lewis—a
      spiritualist, opium‐eater, haschisch‐eater, and heaven knows what. Does he see much of him
      now?”
“He has quarrelled with Edmund Lewis, I fancy.”
“Ah—so much the better. Then this would evidently be the moment to act. Of course
       I know it will be awfully difficult and horrible for you;
      because he’ll feel so miserably ashamed before you, and, of course, you will feel it almost as
      badly as he. But still, you are the only person that can influence him. You see he loves you,
      worships you, all that sort of thing. And I am sure you will have the courage to get over your
      repugnance to a disagreeable half‐hour, won’t you, Annie, for your own sake as well as
      his?”
“I will do my best,” said Miss Brown.
MISS BROWN went up to her room slowly, and slowly proceeded to undress.
“You look very tired, miss,” said her maid; “haven’t you perhaps been overtiring yourself so
      soon after your illness? and don’t you think you had better let me brush your hair for
      you?”
Anne shook her head; she had never consented to let any one wait upon her except when ill,
      with that odd feeling that she, a servant, had no right to have a servant; and the maid whom
      Hamlin considered as a sort of necessary institution for a woman in Miss Brown’s position, had
      been virtually put at the disposal of Mrs Macgregor, whose constant fidgeting over her
      clothes, and tea, and coffee,
       and food, according to hygienic theories of thirty years
      back, might have afforded occupation not to two but to twenty maids. Anne really did look very
      worn out; more so than she had seemed these several weeks, thought the maid.
“No, thank you, Laura,” said Miss Brown. She really did not feel at all as if she could
      sleep; she felt the blood rushing through every artery of her body, and a hot faintness
      overtake her.
“It won’t do to make myself ill again,” she said to herself. The doctor had said that for
      the present she must try and get as much sleep as possible; and she was a practical,
      methodical person. She brushed her hair, still in short wavy masses since it was cut during
      the fever, carefully, slowly. It seemed to her as if, in the half light, it looked more grey
      than black. She pulled out a few white hairs: they come early in hair as dark and wiry as
      hers. She folded her clothes methodically, as she used to fold the clothes of
       the little Perrys, put out her light and lay down.
“It won’t do to make myself ill again,” she said; and, closing her eyes, determined to
      sleep.
She remained stretched out rigidly, like a dead woman, her head straight on her pillows, and
      trying to keep her mind as rigid as her body. But it was of no use. She could not sleep; her
      blood and her thoughts seemed to throb furiously within her.
Anne’s mind had been made up, quietly, methodically, much in the same way as her hair had
      been brushed and her clothes folded, already a good hour ago, when talking to Melton Perry;
      she had seen the necessity of a decision coming, had waited for the moment when the decision
      should be made, ever since she had heard that story of Madame Elaguine and Constantine Bulzo.
      There had been, it seemed to her, no alternative; and there seemed to her that there was no
      alternative now, either. But as she lay motionless in
       her bed, and stared into the darkness with wide‐opened
      eyes, she began, once more, to go over slowly and repeatedly the steps of the argument, which
      had, three or four days ago, become manifest to her as might the mechanism of a broken watch
      to a watchmaker, of any very inevitable and obvious thing.
Hamlin had done everything for her; he had turned what she looked back upon with horror, as
      a kind of intellectual and moral death, into life. He had bought her soul free, had nourished
      and nurtured it, as a man might have redeemed, nourished, and nurtured the body of some slave
      child, doomed to be a cripple in a crippling occupation; he had done, she felt assured, what
      no other man had ever done for a woman, since no other woman, she thought, could have escaped
      from such a state of utter soul stagnation as had already begun, those five years ago, in her
      slow, sullen nature. It was more than had ever been done for another woman, and Anne felt its
      value
       more than any other; for despite the modesty and frankness
      which often took others aback, the very stuff of her soul, like the very mould of her
      features, was pride. She knew herself to be nobler than the majority of men and women; not
      more intelligent, nor more honest, nor more kindly, nor any one particular quality, but more
      homogeneous of nature; not alloyed in any portion, whatever she might be; upright, sincere,
      practical, harsh even, through and through: a reality, where they seemed but half reality and
      half make‐up. And that she should be this she owed to Hamlin; without him she would have been
      equally homogeneous of soul, but it would have been with the uniformity, the rigidity of
      spiritual death.
What Hamlin had done, he had done from no base motives, and without the smallest taint of
      baseness in the doing: he had not actually wanted her, he had wanted merely to perfect a thing
      that seemed to him good of its sort, to make her a soul that should suit
       her body; he had done it deliberately, consistently,
      unwearyingly, with a gentleness, a generous tact, which had themselves been a benefit.
That Hamlin had acted from an imaginative whim, that he had carried out an exotic artistic
      caprice, played a sublimated game of artistic skill, Anne could not at this moment take into
      account. She knew, and only too well, that Hamlin was selfish, whimsical, fantastic, vain, a
      seeker after new poses and new sensations; but she knew all
      this analytically, piecemeal as the result of thought; and she was in a sense too dull, too
      unable to comprehend others, and, above all, too utterly devoid of all vanity, whimsicalness,
      and theatricality, too completely of a piece, a mass of granite, as she often felt, to
      conceive these analytically recognised peculiarities as absolutely organic and active forces.
      She had conceived Hamlin to be that which to her was the easiest conception—generous; and
      nothing could make her conceive his behaviour towards her in any
       any other light. Moreover, there remained in this frank and
      fearless nature, shrinking from no disillusions, one delusion which was the safer for her very
      consciousness of uncompromising hatred of all delusions. She clung, without knowing it, to the
      belief that in one thing at least Hamlin had been perfectly noble, that no subsequently
      discovered weakness and baseness could ever alter that; she treasured up a shred of her old
      ideal, the belief that whatever Hamlin might be towards others and towards himself, towards
      her he had been the real Hamlin whom she had loved and worshipped.
And now this Hamlin, this man to whom she owed all, and whose past she still loved, was
      gradually being alienated from all the nobler things for which he was fit—gradually being
      separated from his nobler self, and dragged, stripped of all his better qualities, into a
      moral quagmire, a charnel, a cloaca, to stick and rot inchwise. And this, Anne said to
      herself, to some degree by her own
       fault; for had she not let her antipathy for the tendencies
      which she had gradually discovered in him, and her loathing for the tendencies of the men who
      surrounded him, smother her gratitude, her sympathy, turn her away in sullen scorn and
      isolation, from the man whom she was bound to help, and the men whom she was bound to combat?
      She forgot for the moment the many abortive attempts she had made to awaken the better
      qualities of Hamlin; or rather, she could no longer conceive that those attempts had been
      sufficiently strenuous and determined; it seemed to her, forgetful of the dead‐weight of
      opposition, that she must have been very feeble and half‐hearted. Instead of thinking of him,
      she had thought only of herself, of preserving her own soul from infection, of keeping her own
      soul strong and active; she had selfishly thought of the world’s miseries, which she could not
      prevent, instead of thinking of Hamlin, whom she might have saved; and finally, she had let
      herself indulge in dreams of liberty, that is to say, of desertion
       of her duty. Those monks and nuns of former days, for whom
      she felt such unutterable contempt, had they acted differently from her when they left their
      fellow‐men to perish in sin, in order that they might enjoy the luxury of virtue in a convent
      or a desert? She loathed æsthetes like Hamlin; and yet, what had she herself been, save an
      æsthete of another sort, selfishly preoccupied with spiritual comfort, and worse than any of
      them for the very moral consciousness which lay at the root of this immorality?
Why had she not driven away Edmund Lewis, opposing herself to him with all her might? Why
      had she not driven away Sacha Elaguine? Now that she had learned from Melton Perry what this
      woman really was, every single circumstance of their former intercourse, every single fact and
      suggestion that had come to her, from Mrs Macgregor’s warnings to Edmund Lewis’s cowardly
      accusation,—all the hundred little impressions which she herself had received, grouped
      themselves
       together, and made it obvious that Sacha must be, could
      only have been, the horrible walking depravity which she had been revealed. Essentially
      unanalytic of mind, Miss Brown could now no longer conceive how it was that she had not
      understood Madame Elaguine at once; in that massive horror with which the Russian woman had
      filled her, it was impossible to remember all the deluding little circumstances which had
      closed her heart to suspicion—nay, all the purity of her own nature, the charity, the desire
      to be equitable, which had made this now so overpowering mass of abomination not merely
      impossible to realise, but impossible to conceive. It seemed to her as if Sacha must always
      have shown herself what she was; and that she, Anne Brown, must have wilfully closed her eyes.
      She had never asked herself whether it was not her duty towards Hamlin to come to some
      conclusion about his cousin; she had let their connection drift on; she had seen in the ruin
      of the man to whom she owed all, only a means to her
       own deliverance from a life which she hated, from a duty
      which she shirked. Anne remembered how she had watched with terror that look of weariness and
      shame on Hamlin’s face, which ought to have told her that this poor, weak, sick soul might
      still be saved; she remembered the joy with which she had heard of Hamlin’s departure for
      Paris—that is to say, of the crowning act of weakness and folly which had made him the chattel
      of his cousin. Anne loathed herself as a woman might loathe herself, who recognised that she
      had let some living creature die of hunger and want of nursing. Shame she did not feel, nor
      yet remorse; she cared too little for herself to care for her own ideals; she did not once
      think that she had been mistaken, that she had been base, ungrateful, that she was dishonoured
      in her own eyes; she merely thought that Hamlin was on the brink of ruin, ruin of all his
      nobler self and of his happiness—that she had done it, and that she was there, alone, to save
      him. In those long hours, lying motionless in the
       dark, the face of Hamlin, as she had recently seen it, that
      weak, profoundly depressed, half‐degraded face, was constantly before her eyes; and
      surrounding it, vague and threatening, the faces—so strangely like it and transfigured in a
      kind of tragic degradation, of the portraits at Wotton Hall—of Hamlin’s half‐crazy, disgraced
      brother; of his odious, passion‐stained father; of his drunken uncles; above all, that
      beautiful woman’s face, with the curled hair and loose collar—that face so curiously
      compounded of effeminacy, whimsicalness, and cynical self‐abandonment; of his great‐uncle
      Mordaunt, whose portrait had been exiled to the lumber‐room, whose name banished from the
      memory of his relatives; and along with them, and resembling them like a brother, the
      confused, imaginary image of that miserable Greek lad whom Sacha Elaguine had ruined.
Was it still time? Could Hamlin still be saved? was he already hopelessly bound for life to
      Madame Elaguine? Had Anne waked
       up too late? She did not know. She only knew that there was
      not an hour, not a moment to lose; and that there was but one thing to be done. Hamlin must
      not, should not, marry Sacha. And the only way to prevent it was that he should marry Anne
      Brown. He might, as Lewis said, and as she believed, already be the lover of Madame Elaguine;
      but he was not yet the husband, and most probably not yet the betrothed. And was he not bound,
      by that paper which the ignoble suspiciousness of Richard Brown had required of him in that
      distant past in Florence, to marry Anne Brown at whatever time she rnight call upon him to do
      so?
“I must become his wife,” said Anne to herself; and she said it as she might have said “the
      sun must rise in so many hours.” There was no room for hesitation on her part; the choice, the
      act of volition, was so decided, that there ceased to be either choice or volition; to become
      Hamlin’s wife seemed to Anne as an inevitable necessity coming from
       without. But little by little: as she lay there broad
      awake, yet with somewhat of that tendency, as of an opium‐dreamer, to see things exaggerated
      which comes to us in darkness, she began to realise the meaning of this formula—to become
      Hamlin’s wife. The whole past rushed into her mind, and became, as it were, the mirage of the
      future, and that mirage was horrible. To be Hamlin’s wife meant to relinquish the liberty
      which had, for the last two or three months, been safe within her grasp, the liberty of being
      herself. Anne was one of those natures which, though able, by moments, to enjoy themselves
      like children, do not believe much in happiness; to whom, singled out, as it were, to achieve
      self‐sacrifice or endure martyrdom, happiness is a mere name, a negative thing—but to whom
      unhappiness is a positive reality, the thing which they expect, with which their soul seems,
      in some pre‐natal condition, to have become familiar as the one great certainty. The
      happiness, therefore, which she was losing—the
       independence, the activity, the serenity, the possibility
      of a life of noble companionship with Richard Brown—all this was only a distant and
      unsubstantial thing; she had never experienced it, and it could not well be realised. But she
      knew by experience, familiar with its every detail, the unhappiness which lay in the future as
      Hamlin’s wife, for this future would be but a return to the past; and she felt as might a
      person lost in a catacomb, and who, having got to a chink, having seen the light and breathed
      the air, should be condemned to wander again, to rethread for ever the black and choking
      corridors leading nowhere. That Hamlin was lost if he married Sacha, she knew as she knew that
      two and two make four; but she did not in the least flatter herself that her own influence
      would be as potent for good, as Madame Elaguine’s must be potent for evil. She knew Hamlin too
      well for that, and herself also. If Hamlin had remained weak, cold, vain, and mean under her
      influence hitherto, he must remain
       so for ever; he was born all these things. She could
      prevent his growing worse, she could not make him grow better; her position would be as that
      of a woman who devoted herself to nurse a person sick of an incurable disease: there would be
      none of the excitement of a possible cure, only the routine, the anxiety peculiar to a case
      where the patient is for ever on the brink of getting worse.
To be understood, to be sympathised with, to be loved really and really to love—none of
      these things would be for her. But, after all, what right had she to any of them? Anne was, in
      all matters concerning herself, a born fatalist and pessimist; the words of Goethe, “Entbehren
      sollst du, sollst entbehren,” were to her not an admonition, but a mere statement of fact. She
      had, for a time, fancied that she clutched happiness; if it had turned out, like the goddess
      clutched by Ixion, a mere mist, why, that was quite natural; there was nothing to complain of
      in that.
But suddenly there came a sense not any
       longer of the loss of happiness, but of a sickened revolt
      from all the things which this sacrifice of happiness implied. Not to love, not to be loved.
      Well, that was natural; but to submit to becoming the property of a man whom she did not love,
      and who could not, in her eyes, ever love her, that was another thing. Edmund Lewis and Madame
      Elaguine, learned in such matters, had been perfectly correct when they declared that Anne
      was, in their sense of the word, passionless, cold. To this woman, consumed by intellectual
      and moral passion, her womanhood meant merely the instincts of superior chastity, of superior
      soul cleanness, which seem the birthright of women, as the instincts of superior generosity,
      of superior soul energy, seem the birthright of men; and this, to her the only result of
      womanhood, merely added a positive element of repulsion to the disdain for what the world is
      pleased to call love already existing in her. Anne Brown, born of the people, grown up as a
      servant, left to take care of herself when
       scarcely more than a child, and then thrust into the midst
      of a demoralised school of literature which gloried in moral indifference,—Anne Brown had none
      of those misty notions of marriage so easily transfigured into poetry, and which make (and
      perhaps fortunately) many clean‐souled and disdainful girls enter unconsciously and unabashed
      upon a life frequently neither very noble nor very clean. Without formulating it to
      herself—for she never formulated anything—Miss Brown had a very strong sense that marriage
      without love was a mere legalised form of prostitution. To become, therefore, the wife of
      Hamlin, was an intolerable self‐degradation—nay, a pollution; for it seemed to her, and the
      idea sickened her whole soul, that the moral pollution of Sacha Elaguine would be communicated
      to her. To become the wife of Sacha’s lover! Her limbs seemed to give way, to dissolve; a
      horrible warm clamminess overtook her; she could not breathe, or breathed only horror.
Anne rose from her bed, and wrapping herself
       in her dressing‐gown, sat down by the window, partly ajar.
      She threw it wide open, pulled up the blinds, and, gasping, looked out into the darkness. The
      sky was covered, not a ray of light; it was raining—she heard the drops fall heavily on the
      leaves under the window; a warm damp gust of air blew in her face. Anne did not know what it
      was to faint, and her limbs did not give way beneath her; but she felt as if her mind, her
      soul, were fainting, growing clammy—slipping, slipping away, dissolving into nothingness. To
      be the wife of Sacha’s lover! With the scornful aversion which a woman of actively chaste
      nature (for the virtue exists in most women only in a negative, passive condition) experiences
      for the more abstract idea of weakness and unchastity, was mingled—perhaps not very clearly to
      herself—somewhat already of the wrath of the outraged wife. Under her very eyes, before all
      the world, Hamlin had deceived her—had been another woman’s lover—and had let her associate
      with his
       mistress! the kind of resentment which the world sometimes
      mistakes for jealousy, but into which there enters no love,—the sense not of being neglected
      as an individual, but being insulted as a woman. To be the wife of Sacha’s lover! Anne’s
      imagination—slow in all things, and slowest where any ignoble or impure thing was
      concerned—was trailed as by an inexplicable force along a dim tract of foulness.
No; she could not marry this man. She had no right to forego her just resentment, to stifle
      her just disgust, no right to degrade her soul in order to save his. If he was weak, vain,
      foredoomed to baseness, let him run his career—fulfil his destiny. Some sacrifices are sins.
      Without identifying the case, Anne’s thoughts reverted to the story, to the words of Isabella
      in ‘Measure for Measure’; and the pride that lay at the bottom of her soul—the pride of purity
      and strength—rose like a great wind within her. No; she would not pollute her cleanness,
      prostitute her nobility, for this
       man. Anne folded her dressing‐gown close about her, and
      extended her strong fingers tight over the arms of her chair—a movement like that of a judge
      about to pronounce a sentence. Any one who could have seen her sitting thus by the window—who
      could have seen that pale stern face, those wide‐opened onyx‐grey eyes looking steadfastly
      into the darkness—would have said that this magnificent young woman with the tragic features
      was capable of cold cruelty.
But though in some measure right, since there is a destructive element in all strong souls,
      the person who should have thought like this would yet have been mistaken. Anne’s
      ruthlessness, her cruelty, could exist only against herself; the sacrifice, which seemed to
      her no very great matter, was the sacrifice of herself.
Anne remained seated for a few minutes by the window, that storm of pride and contempt
      rushing in great gusts through her whole nature. But then suddenly the storm dropped.
Here was Hamlin, to whom she owed everything, owed this very soul which seemed too good to
      be wasted upon him, in danger of being degraded for ever by this loathsome woman, this
      incarnation of all his own vices, this moral disease become a human creature. This fate
       must be averted, Hamlin must be saved, for his own sake and for the
      sake of the world—of all those nobler things that he might still do; he must be saved, and
      only one thing could save him—hence that one thing must be done. Anne rose from the window.
      This darkness unnerved her. She struck a light and lit the candles on the mantelpiece; they
      were in clustered candlesticks, and the room was brilliantly illuminated. Anne looked round
      her. There was a heap of books and papers on her table,—she had been interrupted in tidying
      them the previous day. She began to put them to rights. Some of the books were the manuals of
      political economy and works on philosophy which she was studying with a view to Girton.
       The sight of them made a knot rise in her throat and the
      tears come into her eyes. She felt that she would never read them again. She took them in her
      arms, and opening the lowest drawer of her writing‐table, locked them up. “I will give them to
      Marjory’s women’s club,” she thought. Then she opened another drawer, and got out all her
      note‐books and copy‐books,—her many months’ work, ever since Richard Brown had first lent her
      his primer. She turned over a few pages slowly. The sentences seemed to have no meaning; her
      brain refused to act. She took the papers one by one and tore them into small shreds, and
      threw them into the waste‐paper basket. “There is an end of that,” she said to herself
      quietly. Anne looked round the room once more,—at the spruce Queen Anne furniture which had
      surprised her so much, at the blue and white vases, the shimmering plates, the pieces of
      embroidery on the wall—all the things which Hamlin had put there to please her. Was there
      anything more—anything more to
       be done? On the mantelpiece stood a photograph of Richard
      Brown, unframed, which he had recently given her: she had asked him for a photograph during
      Hamlin’s absence with Sacha. She took the photograph and held it over one of the candles; it
      curled up, charred, only the rim which she held remaining to show what it had been; she turned
      it round and round over the flame, and then threw the crumpled piece of charred pasteboard
      into the grate.
The first pale light of dawn was beginning to mingle with the light of the candles, making
      them burn yellow, and surrounded by a sort of halo, like the tapers round a catafalque.
      Outside she saw the chilly grey streaks of light, the faint cold rose veinings of sunrise. But
      the sunrise itself did not come; the sky gradually appeared, clotted with red and purplish
      reflections; then the colour died away, and there remained instead a pale, suffused, grey
      heaven. It began to drizzle. Anne left the window. The room was light now with
       daylight—the candle‐flames mere yellow specks. Anne put
      them out; she pulled down the blinds and got into bed, and again stretched herself out in that
      stiff way, her head propped up on the pillows, trying not to think. In a few minutes she was
      asleep.
When the maid came in, she did not wake up as usual, and the girl was half‐frightened and
      very much awed by seeing Miss Brown lying straight and motionless; her face, surrounded by a
      sort of wreath of short, curling, iron‐black locks, stiff on the pillow, looking, in the grey
      morning light which came through the pale‐blue blinds, like a dead woman.
Anne opened her eyes and looked round slowly, as if trying to collect her thoughts. “Ah,”
      she said, half audibly, “I remember.”
BY an effort of manœuvring which was not very natural to her, Miss Brown induced
      Melton Perry to take himself off after breakfast and go and see some studios, an expedition
      which would keep him out of the way till lunch. She would have Hamlin all to herself. When
      Perry was gone, Anne sat down to write to Mary Leigh, who was in the country. There was
      absolutely no reason why she should write to Mary, nor had she anything whatever to tell her;
      but she was devoured by a restlessness—by a vague desire to talk to some one who cared for
      her. She told Mary Leigh nothing of what was passing through her mind, nor of the event which
      was pending: there was not, in her letter, a word to suggest
       anything of the sort; but there was in it the expression,
      vague and without motives, of the great emotion which occupied her soul. “I want to tell you,
      dear Mary,” wrote Anne, “how grateful I am for the affection which you and Marjory have shown
      towards me lately. If I had died of that illness, it would have been a great consolation to
      know that you cared for me so much.” She did not know why, the tone of the whole letter, with
      all these expressions of gratitude, had the solemnity of a farewell, as if written by a woman
      who expected to die soon. And Anne really felt as if her life were coming to an end.
When she had finished writing, she went down to Hamlin’s studio. He would come soon, and she
      would wait for him here.
It was still drizzling, and the room opening on to the garden, with its silk blinds drawn
      down, was full of a kind of twilight. Anne walked up and down for a minute or two, looking
      vaguely round her. A drowsy scent of faded flowers, of cigarette‐smoke, of she
       knew not what scent, made her feel weak and dreamy, and
      reminded her, with a movement of disgust, of Sacha Elaguine’s rooms. She had not been in the
      studio of late, except for a few minutes at a time. Everything seemed to her untidy and
      dusty—easels and boards thrown about in a way which was not usual with Hamlin. She looked
      vaguely at the various things,—at the drawings by Rossetti and Burne Jones on the walls, the
      books in cases, the terra cottas and bits of carving on brackets, the piano with the brocade
      cover thrown back, and the score of Wagner’s Tristram still on the desk. She looked at the
      score and played a few notes, but stopped. She loathed that music which Hamlin and Sacha so
      admired—that music, with its strange, insidious faintings and sobbings, its hot, enervating
      gusts of passion. On the mantelpiece, among the Japanese jars, the bronze lamps, and other
      similar properties, her eye caught a small bottle of blue glass. She took it up: it was not
      labelled, or the label was removed, but it
       left a sort of sickly‐smelling stickiness on her fingers.
      So Perry was right; Hamlin had returned to his old practice of taking opium. She put the
      bottle back, and walked up and down once more. Then her eye fell upon an unfinished portrait
      of herself, or what was intended to be herself, which stood in the shadow. A solemn sombre
      woman in green, with very blue peaks and glaciers in the distance, twisting the faded green
      leaves of a palm‐branch. It was the picture which Hamlin had begun long, long ago in Florence;
      and her mind went back to that other rainy day, as gloomy as this one, seemingly centuries
      ago, when she had stood in the tower studio, about to take leave of Hamlin, as she thought,
      for the last time. Was she really as sombre as that picture? thought Anne. On a table, gritty
      with dust, lay an open sketch‐book; Anne took it up listlessly. The sheet was scrawled with
      several versions of an allegorical design, feebly drawn, scarcely more than outlined, and, as
      it seemed, in a moment of weariness.
       A beautiful naked youth was clutched by a huge, haggard
      woman, her torn dress licking his body like flames, her lips greedily advancing to his
      delicate face, which shrank back, like a flower withering in the heat of a furnace. There were
      several versions, crossing and recrossing each other oddly, but always the same flower‐like
      winged boy writhing in the terrible breath of this embrace, always that fainting beautiful
      face, and those burning lips with the suction of flame. Beneath one of the versions was
      scrawled, “Amor a Libidine interfectus,” and a few lines, half scratched out, of a sonnet.
      Anne did not read them; she put down the sketch‐book. She knew the sense of that allegory,
      even before her eye caught the words, “and thus my soul,” which formed one of the lines of the
      rough‐scrawled sonnet. Anne shuddered. Steps came along the corridor—Hamlin’s steps. She sat
      down near the window, for she expected her heart would have begun beating even to bursting.
      But it was not so; Miss Brown felt wonderfully calm.
“I want to talk to you about something, Mr Hamlin,” she said, when he had recovered from the
      surprise of finding her in the studio. “You have nothing very pressing to do just now, I
      hope?”
“Nothing,” answered Hamlin; “I am at your disposal.” He sat down opposite to her, and began
      to fidget with the pencils and pen‐knives lying on the table. He was very pale, haggard, and
      looked tired and worried.
“You don’t seem well,” said Anne, mechanically.
“I am horribly nervous, that’s all,” he answered, passing his hand through his hair. “I
      suppose it’s this damp heat. Will it annoy you if I smoke a cigarette? I feel my brain
      spinning.”
Anne nodded, and waited in silence till he had taken two or three puffs.
“Mr Hamlin,” she suddenly began, in a low, steady voice, rather like a person reciting a
      lesson, “it is going on three years since I left Coblenz and came into this house. I am over
       twenty‐four, and I don’t think it is possible to continue
      much longer on the theory that I am your ward. It is time that something should be decided
      about my future.”
Hamlin listened quietly, with a certain listless and helpless look that was very
      painful.
“I quite agree with you,” he answered, “and I fully see how greatly I am to blame in not
      having forestalled you. You must not suppose that I have not thought more than once about this
      matter. I have done so, I assure you. But somehow, things have always come in the way; and
      then, you know, I—I did not wish to put any pressure upon you. In short, I am unable to say
      how it is that I have placed myself in what may appear to be the wrong in this matter.”
Again he passed his hand across his head.
“Forgive me,” he said, “for being so feeble this morning. I really have a wretched
      headache.”
“I am very sorry for you,” answered Anne, but adding with the same deliberate resolution
      , “but all the same, I feel that I can no longer delay, and
      that I must avail myself of this opportunity to ask you a question. Have you any intention of
      marrying me?”
Hamlin, who had been sitting with his head resting on his hand, vacantly watching the
      wreathing smoke of his cigarette, suddenly looked up at Anne. She was seated very erect in a
      high‐backed chair opposite, looking taller, calmer than ever, less girlish than ever also,
      although he had never thought of her, even years ago, as a girl. He looked at her for a moment
      in silence; a long, lingering, and very melancholy look.
“Miss Brown,” he answered, and his voice became tremulous towards the end of his speech,
      “you have, if you remember the terms of our reciprocal engagement, always been free; and you
      are free. It is rather sad for me to reflect—and perhaps a little sad for you also—how very
      differently things have turned out from what I believe both of us anticipated. And it is, as
      you may understand, not a little
       sad to part with what has been the best thing in my life—to
      end my best episode. But you must remember that I never wished you to be otherwise than
      perfectly independent; it has been a great matter in a useless life like mine to have
      contributed to reinstate you, as it were, in your birthright; it will be something to think of
      later, that I have been conducive in making you what you are; and”—Hamlin had risen from his
      chair and stretched out his hand—“will you believe me also when I say that I am very, very
      happy that you have found a man whom you can love and respect, and who can make you
      happy?”
Hamlin’s mouth, that delicate mouth with the uncertain lines, began to quiver. Anne turned
      very red, and then, suddenly, very white. She did not take his hand; she did not look at him
      as he stood before her; her eyes seemed fixed in space, as she answered in a voice which
      became steadier and louder as she went on—
“You don’t understand me. I was not
       alluding to any notion of marrying my cousin. I don’t want
      to marry Richard. What I want to ask you is this: Will you marry me, Mr Hamlin?”
Anne, spoke very slowly, gravely, and calmly; but as she spoke, she felt her heart tighten.
      There remained still one chance, one shred of hope, and in another moment that might be
      gone.
A sudden convulsion passed over Hamlin’s face; he caught at the back of a chair, for he
      seemed trembling and reeling, his eyes closed for a moment as if he were choking, and he made
      a vague helpless movement with one hand, as a man who cannot speak. Then, suddenly, he flung
      himself down before Miss Brown’s chair, seized both her hands, and covered his face with
      them.
“Anne—Anne!” he cried.
They remained thus for a moment; she seated upright in the chair, he on his knees, her hands
      pressed to his face.
“Anne—you love me,” he murmured.
Miss Brown did not answer. She looked straight before her into space, fixedly, vaguely,
      taking in nothing, with her solemn, tearless, grey eyes. She felt as if she were waiting she
      knew not for what, counting the tickings of an unheard clock.
“You love me, Anne; you love me!” cried Hamlin, louder; and pressing closer to her, he put
      out his arms, and drew down her face to his, and kissed her, twice, thrice, a long kiss on the
      mouth.
It seemed to Anne as if she felt again the throttling arms of Sacha Elaguine about her neck,
      her convulsive kiss on her face, the cloud of her drowsily scented hair stifling her. She drew
      back, and loosened his grasp with her strong hands.
Hamlin sprang up. His face was changed: he was radiant. He took her hand in both his, and
      looked long into her eyes.
“Forgive me,” he whispered; “forgive me—oh, forgive me, Anne. That all this time I should
      have been so blind—thought
       you indifferent and contemptuous. Oh, forgive me for all my
      wickedness, my folly; forgive me, my darling, for not having understood that I belonged to
      you, that you loved me.”
Anne nodded without speaking. She could not tell a lie, even now; and she knew she must not
      tell the truth. Yet never perhaps had she loathed Hamlin as she loathed him—vain, fatuously
      happy—at this moment that he believed she had confessed that she loved him.
“Well, then,” she said quickly, “perhaps you can understand that—after what has passed, you
      understand—I am anxious that we should get married at once. Perry was asking me, only the
      other day, why things had dragged on so long; and then also there is . . .”
“I understand,” interrupted Hamlin. “Oh, forgive me, dearest. I never, never really loved
      that woman: I could not have loved her. I have never loved but you. Will you believe it?”
“You will never see her again?—I mean, never except in my presence? ” went on Anne. “Will
      you promise that? And will you promise to leave London in a day or two—to go to Italy,
      anywhere where she is not—and wait till I can join you with Aunt Claudia?”
“I promise; I will do anything. Oh, Anne, if only you will forget all that; if you will
      believe me when I tell you that I never loved that woman—that I felt the whole time that she
      was debasing, humiliating me, making me forfeit all my honour and my happiness . . .”
Anne paid no attention to these assurances. So he was shifting all the shame of his weakness
      and baseness and sensuality on to another,—washing his hands of the woman who had given
      herself to him. How like him! How well, how terribly well, Anne knew him!
“You have promised, remember,” she repeated,—“you will leave to‐morrow, the day after—as
      soon as you can. You won’t tell her where you are going—do you understand? You will write
      to‐day, and tell her of our
       marriage, and that you have promised never to see her
      again.”
Hamlin kissed her hand with passion.
“And listen,” went on Miss Brown; “this evening there is a big party at the Argiropoulos. I
      did not intend going; but I wish to go now. Write to Mrs Argiropoulo to tell her we are coming
      together; explain that we are going to be married; ask her to tell all her guests. I want
      every one to know. Do you understand, Mr Hamlin—Walter, I mean? You won’t lose time, will
      you?”
“No, no!” cried Hamlin; “I understand. Only forgive me; and tell me that you love me, my
      darling;” and he seized Anne, and kissed her again with a sort of fury. “Tell me that you
      forgive me for all that I have made you suffer, Anne. Speak,—only one word, Anne—one
      word.”
Anne covered her eyes with her hand.
“I forgive you, Walter,” she answered, and burst into tears. But she wiped them away, and,
      rising suddenly, left the room.
“Walter is leaving for Italy to‐morrow,” she said, as she met Melton Perry in the corridor.
      “I want you to accompany me and Aunt Claudia there in a few days. Mr Hamlin and I are going to
      be married.”
“God bless my soul!” cried Perry. “When—where—why didn’t you tell me before?” But Anne was
      out of sight.
IN the blazing drawing‐room, where a crowd of black coats and shining bare
      shoulders and fashionable dresses contrasted drolly with the melancholy thin Cupids of Burne
      Jones, the mournful mysterious ladies of Rossetti, which adorned the walls, one of Mrs
      Argiropoulo’s many musical celebrities was wailing Austrian popular songs at the piano. Miss
      Brown, who had undergone the universal staring and received the general congratulations with a
      monosyllabic composure much criticised on all hands, had slipped away, when the Austrian tenor
      approached the piano, to the furthest end of the room, where she was half protected from sight
      by the plants of an adjacent conservatory. All this triumph, people said to themselves
      , as they looked round at her seated alone in the corner,
      dressed in a wonderful garment of cloth‐of‐silver, resting her dark head on her hand, was too
      much even for her. Yet in reality Miss Brown did not feel any emotion; she was too tired for
      that. She felt as if she had just finished a long journey, or as she used sometimes to do
      years ago after a hard morning’s ironing in summer—weary, broken, too numb for thought or for
      pain. The guttural voice of the Austrian tenor, wailing out the simple little mountain songs,
      which would at any other time have brought the tears into her eyes and a thought of death into
      her heart, seemed to her vague and distant like a voice in a dream; and like a crowd seen
      through a mist seemed all these very concrete men and women all about her. As the last notes
      of the song died away, she felt the touch of a fan, the downy stroke of a bunch of feathers,
      on her neck. It was Madame Elaguine behind her; but the sight of Madame Elaguine caused Anne
      no emotion, and she
       followed the Russian woman, who beckoned her into the
      neighbouring conservatory, in the same absent way as she had answered the congratulations of
      her acquaintances.
“You are very tired, Annie dear,” said Madame Elaguine, in one of her caressing
      half‐whispers, but fixing her eyes on Miss Brown with a look which was anything but a caress.
      “All this emotion—this general ovation and triumph, this great joy of satisfied love—has been
      too much for you, poor child!”
Anne shook her head, thrown back on the Persian embroidery of an ottoman, among the large
      tropical leaves and the delicate stems of bamboos and fern plants. She knew that this woman
      wished to insult her; but she was too weary and absent‐minded to care.
“I am merely rather tired. I didn’t get much sleep last night,” she answered, as she might
      have answered the maid who pulled up her blinds in the morning. Madame Elaguine seemed a
      hundred miles away from her: she
       shrank neither from a woman whom she loathed, nor from a
      woman who, she felt, was bent upon insulting her.
She did not feel Madame Elaguine’s glance, although the glance was concentrated hatred and
      outrage.
“Poor child!” repeated Sacha, taking one of her hands and pressing it between her own
      burning ones. “Poor child! Ah, well, I won’t bore you with congratulations. I know Walter
      sufficiently well to know how happy he will make you; and I know how deeply you have loved him
      all the while, and how faithfully he has always loved you. But I want to give you a little
      wedding‐present. I have brought it here, because Walter has written to me that you don’t want
      to have your bliss disturbed, and are going off at once. Quite right. When people are very
      happy, there’s something immodest in letting the world see it and be jealous; that’s the
      classic view, isn’t it?” As she spoke she drew from out of her cloud of lace and feather
      trimmings a little leathern case.
“Oh dear no,” went on Madame Elaguine, “you mustn’t think I’ve been ruining myself. I’m far
      too much of a pauper and far too selfish to go making handsome presents. It doesn’t cost me
      anything, you see, for Walter gave me them last month; and as I really don’t care a jackstraw
      about pearls, and I accepted them merely to please him, I think it’s much better you should
      have them to make the set complete, since you have the necklace.”
The case contained two large pearl ear‐rings, which Anne immediately recognised as part of
      the set once belonging to Hamlin’s mother which he had shown her long ago at Wotton. Round her
      own neck was the former Mrs Hamlin’s pearl necklace; he had given it to her that evening, not
      a fortnight, perhaps, since giving Sacha the ear‐rings.
Anne looked at the ear‐rings for a moment, feeling the triumphant eyes of Sacha upon her;
      she felt also her face grow crimson, and her soul waking out of its state of lethargic
      indifference, with a fierce desire to tear the pearls
       off her own throat, and crush them into the carpet with her
      foot.
“Thank you,” she merely said, closing the box and handing it back to Sacha; “I don’t think I
      could wear them, Madame Elaguine. And I don’t think my husband would wish me to wear them,”
      she added, but the words half stuck in her throat.
“Won’t you, really?” said the Russian. “I assure you Walter will be most mortified if he
      hear that you have refused them. It would be a hundred pities that the set should be spoilt. I
      wouldn’t have taken these, if he hadn’t told me that I should have the rest. You see, I was
      the nearest of kin last month. And I’m sure it would make poor Aunt Philippa turn in her grave
      to know that all her things did not go to Miss Anne Brown. Ah, well—as you like. I can always
      get them exchanged at the jeweller’s for something else—or I’ll tell Walter, and he can buy
      them back for you. That’s more like a pauper’s proceeding.”
“Thank you, Madame Elaguine,” said Anne,
       preparing to rise, “I think I ought to go and talk to some
      of the people in the next room.”
But Madame Elaguine laid hold of her wrist. “Don’t go yet, my dear Madonna of the Glaciers—I
      shan’t see you again, perhaps, for a long while, and I want you to tell me some things. I’m a
      horrible ill‐bred little creature, I know, but I can’t help it. I’ve always had a lot of
      morbid curiosities. One of them is how love‐marriages are made up—how it all comes about. You
      see I wasn’t married for love—I was married for money by my Russian relations. But I always
      think I should like to know about love‐marriages. Tell me what Walter said to you—how he did
      it. I wish I’d seen it.”
Anne’s face was burning. Each of Madame Elaguine’s words was a piece of insolence.
“Did you always love him—ever since the beginning—ever since he sent you to school; and have
      you always gone on caring for him in the same way?” went on Madame Elaguine. “Fancy, I thought
      you didn’t care much for
       Walter, almost disliked him; I almost thought you were in
      love with your big black cousin. It was like my obtuseness! Do tell me all about it . . .”
“There is nothing to tell you, Madame Elaguine,” said Anne. “Mr Hamlin and I are going to be
      married, that’s all.”
“In short,” answered Madame Elaguine, bursting into an angry laugh, “you thought better of
      it; you learned to appreciate the satisfaction of getting a handsome husband, with a good name
      and a good fortune. I think you are quite right. Mrs Hamlin of Wotton sounds better than Mrs
      Richard Brown. Or else are you still sufficiently human to enjoy making a man give the cold
      shoulder to another woman? I fear I must spoil your satisfaction in this. I have never cared a
      button for Walter. I would not have married Walter for anything you could offer me; I only
      cared to bring down his pride a little, in remembrance of the days when his great virtue of
      seventeen had me turned out of my uncle’s house, like a
       housemaid who has made love with the butler. As to Walter
      himself, you are welcome to him, though I don’t promise that some day the whim may not return
      to me to amuse myself a little more at his expense.” Miss Brown looked at Madame Elaguine with
      disgust: this delicate charming little creature seemed suddenly transformed into Mrs Perry’s
      housemaid Beppa, whom she had overtaken one day, years ago in Florence, browbeating and
      insulting the laundress’s girl, accusing her of trying to get between herself and the
      man‐cook.
“All this is very useless and disagreeable,” she said, rising to go. “Good‐bye, Madame
      Elaguine.”
But Sacha laid her hand on Miss Brown’s arm.
“I see,” she said, “your friend and former master Mr Perry has been entertaining you with
      anecdotes of my life, and perhaps Edmund Lewis has been doing so also. Very shocking, weren’t
      they? Well, I won’t insult you any longer with my presence. But I
       think it’s as well that you should know in time that if I
      have been in the mud according to your ideas, Walter Hamlin has been into it with me. It’s
      rather difficult to make such things clear to a Madonna of the Glaciers, but perhaps Mr Perry
      will help you to understand the matter. To put it plainly, ever since you fell ill, Walter has
      been my lover.”
The little woman spoke in a very low but very distinct voice, unabashed, brazen, almost
      smiling. She said the last words not in shame, but in triumph; hurled them at Anne as an
      outrage, almost as a thunderbolt.
“I knew it already,” answered Miss Brown, gathering her white brocade skirts about her.
“You knew it!” exclaimed Madame Elaguine, staring at her as if she could not believe her
      ears.
“You knew it!” she repeated after a moment, a sudden triumphant scorn coming into her face.
      “You knew it, and you make him marry you all the same! Well, I wish you all possible
      happiness, and I rejoice that
       Walter has got a wife who understands so well how to deal
      with him. As to me, pray don’t think that I bear you any malice. I am only surprised and
      amused; and extremely interested, from the psychological point of view, in finding that a
      virtuous woman may condescend to things which would turn the stomach of a woman who has no
      pretence to virtue.”
Anne brushed aside the palm‐leaves and ferns of the conservatory door. A sudden pain, as of
      a blow with the fist, was at her heart. She did not answer, for she felt that there was truth
      in Sacha’s insult.
Miss Brown had forgotten that ignominy is an almost indispensable part of all martyrdom.
She found Hamlin standing in a little knot of friends.
“I fear I must be going home rather early,” he said, “as I set off for the Italian lakes
      tomorrow morning, and all my packing still remains to be done. And I think,” he added, with a
      kind of supplicating look, “that Miss
       Brown looks rather tired also, and ought to let me escort
      her home.”
Anne nodded. She saw the burly shoulders, the bushy black head of Richard Brown in the
      crowd, and she dreaded meeting him.
“Let us go,” she said.
But as they were turning away, Richard made his way to his cousin.
“Good evening, Annie,” he said, in an off‐hand voice; “I have had no opportunity of
      congratulating you and Mr Hamlin.”
“Thank you, Dick,” answered Miss Brown, her eyes mechanically avoiding his. “I’m sorry it’s
      so late; the carriage is at the door, and Mr Hamlin and I must be leaving.”
“Ah, very good!” said Brown. “Well, then, I will take you down, and help you to get your
      wraps, while Mr Hamlin finishes taking leave of his friends.” He gave a contemptuous nod to
      Hamlin, waited for Anne to have said good‐bye to her friends, and pushed his way with her
      through the crowd, while
       Mrs Argiropoulo murmured, for the thirtieth or fortieth
      time that evening—
“Well, I must say it is a satisfaction to see two people who are really made for each other,
      like Walter Hamlin and dear Anne.”
There was no one as yet in the highly æsthetic study, which had been turned into a perfect
      exhibition of fantastic shawls and opera‐cloaks. They had said nothing while going
      down‐stairs, and even now Richard Brown was silent, as he hunted about for his cousin’s
      cloak.
“Anne, are you there?” asked Hamlin’s voice from the corridor.
Richard Brown’s heavy brows contracted. “Here’s your fan,” he said, stooping to pick it up.
      “Good‐bye, Nan! I hope you may be happy—”
She stretched out her hand. “Good‐bye, Dick!” said Miss Brown, raising her eyes shyly upon
      him; “you have been very good to me—”
Richard looked at her for a moment as she stood under the lamp, in her shimmering white
       dress. Then, as she was going away on Hamlin’s entrance, he
      turned round suddenly to her and murmured, in his hot angry whisper—
“Good‐bye, Nan—you mercenary creature!”
A few intimate friends had assembled near the hall door, to say good‐bye.
“Here, Mr Chough,” cried fat old Mr Saunders, the impeccable disciple of Fra Angelico,
      “you’ll be just in time to write a nice bridal ode while Miss Brown packs her boxes to‐morrow.
      Mind you cut out Spenser and Suckling and all the rest of them, old boy.”
Cosmo Chough, his cat‐like black whiskers brushed fiercely over a shirt fantastically
      frilled and starched, to show his eighteenth‐century proclivities, made one of his beautiful
      bows.
“Some better poet than I must write that ode,” he said; “all that her poor servant Cosmo can
      do, is to thank Miss Brown from all his heart for marrying his dearest friend.”
Anne heard the voice of the Poet of Womanhood vaguely, distantly, like all the others.
“Is the carriage there, Mr Hamlin?” she asked.
“Here it is. Good night! Good‐bye!” cried Hamlin. He jumped in after her.
“Oh, Anne! that you should really have loved me all this time—you, really you; and that I
      should never have understood it,” he whispered, pressing her hand, as the carriage rolled
      off.
“Are you cold, my love?”
Miss Brown suddenly shivered, as he put his arm round her shoulder. The flash of a street
      lamp as they passed quickly, had shown her Hamlin’s face close to her own, and radiant with
      the triumph of satisfied vanity.
