A small, shiny, pink card lay on the round table in Sylvia Bailey's sitting-room at the Hôtel
     de l'Horloge in Paris.
She had become quite accustomed to finding one or more cards—cards from dressmakers, cards
     from corset-makers, cards from hairdressers—lying on her sitting-room table, but there had
     never been a card quite like this card.
Although it was pink, it looked more like a visiting-card than a tradesman's advertisement,
     and she took it up with some curiosity. It was inscribed "Madame Cagliostra," and underneath
     the name were written the words "Diseuse de la Bonne Aventure," and then, in a corner,
     in very small black letters, the address, "5, Rue Jolie, Montmartre."
A fortune-teller's card? What an extraordinary thing!
Like many pretty, prosperous, idle women, Sylvia was rather superstitious. Not long before
     this, her first visit to Paris, a London acquaintance had taken her to see a noted palmist
     named "Pharaoh," in Bond Street. She had paid her guinea willingly enough, but the result had
     vaguely disappointed her, and she had had the feeling, all the time she was with him, that the
     man was not really reading her hand.
True, "Pharaoh" had told her she was going abroad, and at that time she had no intention of
     doing so. The palmist had also told her—and this was really rather curious—that she would meet,
     when abroad, a foreign woman who would have a considerable influence on her life. Well, in this
     very Hôtel de l'Horloge Mrs. Bailey had come across a Polish lady, named Anna Wolsky, who was,
     like Sylvia herself, a young widow, and the two had taken a great fancy to one another.
It was most unlikely that Madame Wolsky would have the slightest influence on her, Sylvia
     Bailey's, life, but at any rate it was very curious coincidence. "Pharaoh" had proved to be
     right as to these two things—she had come abroad, and she had formed a friendship with a
     foreign woman.
Mrs. Bailey was still standing by the table, and still holding the pink card in her hand,
     when her new friend came into the room.
"Well?" said Anna Wolsky, speaking English with a strong foreign accent, but still speaking
     it remarkably well, "Have you yet decided, my dear, what we shall do this afternoon? There are
     a dozen things open to us, and I am absolutely at your service to do any one of them!"
Sylvia Bailey laughingly shook her head.
"I feel lazy," she said. "I've been at the Bon Marché ever since nine o'clock, and I feel
     more like having a rest than going out again, though it does seem a shame to stay in a day like
     this!"
The windows were wide open, the June sun was streaming in, and on the light breeze was borne
     the murmur of the traffic in the Avenue de l'Opéra, within a few yards of the quiet street
     where the Hôtel de l'Horloge is situated.
The other woman—Anna Wolsky was some years older than Sylvia Bailey—smiled indulgently.
"Tiens!" she cried suddenly, "what have you got there?" and she took the pink card
     out of Sylvia's hand.
"Madame Cagliostra?" she repeated, musingly. "Now where did I hear that name? Yes, of course
     it was from our chambermaid! Cagliostra is a friend of hers, and, according to her, a
     marvellous person—one from whom the devil keeps no secrets! She charges only five francs for a
     consultation, and it appears that all sorts of well-known people go to her, even those whom the
     Parisians call the Gratin, that is, the Upper Crust, from the Champs Elysées and the
     Faubourg St. Germain!"
"I don't think much of fortune-tellers," said Sylvia, thoughtfully. "I went to one last time
     I was in London and he really didn't tell me anything of the slightest interest."
Her conscience pricked her a little as she said this, for "Pharaoh" had certainly predicted a
     journey which she had then no intention of taking, and a meeting with a foreign woman. Yet here
     she was in Paris, and here was the foreign woman standing close to her!
Nay more, Anna Wolsky had become—it was really rather odd that it should be so—the first
     intimate friend of her own sex Sylvia had made since she was a grown-up woman.
"I do believe in fortune-tellers," said Madame Wolsky deliberately, "and that being so I
     shall spend my afternoon in going up to Montmartre, to the Rue Jolie, to hear what this
     Cagliostra has to say. It will be what you in England call 'a lark'! And I do not see why I
     should not give myself so cheap a lark as a five-franc lark!"
"Oh, if you really mean to go, I think I will go too!" cried Sylvia, gaily.
She was beginning to feel less tired, and the thought of a long lonely afternoon spent
     indoors and by herself lacked attraction.
Linking her arm through her friend's, she went downstairs and into the barely furnished
     dining-room, which was so very unlike an English hotel dining-room. In this dining-room the
     wallpaper simulated a vine-covered trellis, from out of which peeped blue-plumaged birds, and
     on each little table, covered by an unbleached table-cloth, stood an oil and vinegar cruet and
     a half-bottle of wine.
The Hôtel de l'Horloge was a typical French hotel, and foreigners very seldom stayed there.
     Sylvia had been told of the place by the old French lady who had been her governess, and who
     had taught her to speak French exceptionally well.
Several quiet Frenchmen, who had offices in the neighbourhood, were "en pension" at
     the Hôtel de l'Horloge, and as the two friends came in many were the steady, speculative
     glances cast in their direction.
To the average Frenchman every woman is interesting; for every Frenchman is in love with
     love, and in each fair stranger he sees the possible heroine of a romance in which he may play
     the agreeable part of hero. So it was that Sylvia Bailey and Anna Wolsky both had their silent
     admirers among those who lunched and dined in the narrow green and white dining-room of the
     Hôtel de l'Horloge.
Only a Frenchman would have given a second look at the Polish lady while Sylvia was by, but a
     Frenchman, being both a philosopher and a logician by nature, is very apt to content himself
     with the second-best when he knows the best is not for him.
The two friends were in entire contrast to one another. Madame Wolsky was tall, dark, almost
     swarthy; there was a look of rather haughty pride and reserve on her strong-featured face. She
     dressed extremely plainly, the only ornament ever worn by her being a small gold horseshoe, in
     the centre of which was treasured—so, not long ago, she had confided to Sylvia, who had been at
     once horrified and thrilled—a piece of the rope with which a man had hanged himself at Monte
     Carlo two years before! For Madame Wolsky—and she made no secret of the fact to her new
     friend—was a gambler.
Anna Wolsky was never really happy, she did not feel more than half alive, when away from the
     green cloth. She had only left Monte Carlo when the heat began to make the place unbearable to
     one of her northern temperament, and she was soon moving on to one of the French
     watering-places, where gambling of sorts can be indulged in all the summer through.
Different in looks, in temperament, and in tastes were the two young widows, and this,
     perhaps, was why they got on so excellently well together.
Sylvia Bailey was the foreign ideal of a beautiful Englishwoman. Her hair was fair, and
     curled naturally. Her eyes were of that blue which looks violet in the sunlight; and she had a
     delicate, rose leaf complexion.
Married when only nineteen to a man much older than herself, she was now at twenty-five a
     widow, and one without any intimate duties or close ties to fill her existence. Though she had
     mourned George Bailey sincerely, she had soon recovered all her normal interest and pleasure in
     life.
Mrs. Bailey was fond of dress and able to indulge her taste; but, even so, good feeling and
     the standard of propriety of the English country town of Market Dalling where she had spent
     most of her life, perhaps also a subtle instinct that nothing else would ever suit her so well,
     made her remain rigidly faithful to white and black, pale grey, and lavender. She also wore
     only one ornament, but it was a very becoming and an exceedingly costly ornament, for it
     consisted of a string of large and finely-matched pearls.
As the two friends went upstairs after luncheon Madame Wolsky said earnestly, "If I were you,
     Sylvia, I would certainly leave your pearls in the office this afternoon. Where is the use of
     wearing them on such an expedition as that to a fortune-teller?"
"But why shouldn't I wear them?" asked Sylvia, rather surprised.
"Well, in your place I should certainly leave anything as valuable as your pearls in safe
     keeping. After all, we know nothing of this Madame Cagliostra, and Montmartre is what Parisians
     call an eccentric quarter."
Sylvia Bailey disliked very much taking off her pearls. Though she could not have put the
     fact into words, this string of pearls was to her a symbol of her freedom, almost of her
     womanhood.
As a child and young girl she had been under the close guardianship of a stern father, and it
     was to please him that she had married the rich, middle-aged man at Market Dalling whose
     adoration she had endured rather than reciprocated. George Bailey also had been a determined
     man—determined that his young wife should live his way, not hers. During their brief married
     life he had heaped on her showy, rather than beautiful, jewels; nothing of great value, nothing
     she could wear when in mourning.
And then, four months after her husband's death, Sylvia's own aunt had died and left her a
     thousand pounds. It was this legacy—which her trustee, a young solicitor named William Chester,
     who was also a friend and an admirer of hers, as well as her trustee, had been proposing to
     invest in what he called "a remarkably good thing"—Mrs. Bailey had insisted on squandering on a
     string of pearls!
Sylvia had become aware, in the subtle way in which Women become aware of such things, that
     pearls were the fashion—in fact, in one sense, "the only wear." She had noticed that most of
     the great ladies of the neighbourhood of Market Dalling, those whom she saw on those occasions
     when town and county meet, each wore a string of pearls. She had also come to know that pearls
     seem to be the only gems which can be worn with absolute propriety by a widow, and so,
     suddenly, she had made up her mind to invest—she called it an "investment," while Chester
     called it an "absurd extravagance"—in a string of pearls.
Bill Chester had done his very best to persuade her to give up her silly notion, but she had
     held good; she had shown herself, at any rate on this one occasion, and in spite of her kindly,
     yielding nature, obstinate.
This was why her beautiful pearls had become to Sylvia Bailey a symbol of her freedom. The
     thousand pounds, invested as Bill Chester had meant to invest it, would have brought her in £55
     a year, so he had told her in a grave, disapproving tone.
In return she had told him, the colour rushing into her pretty face, that after all she had
     the right to do what she chose with her legacy, the more so that this thousand pounds was in a
     peculiar sense her own money, as the woman who had left it her was her mother's sister, having
     nothing to do either with her father or with the late George Bailey!
And so she had had her way—nay, more; Chester, at the very last, had gone to great trouble in
     order that she might not be cheated over her purchase. Best of all, Bill—Sylvia always called
     the serious-minded young lawyer "Bill"—had lived to admit that Mrs. Bailey had made a good
     investment after all, for her pearls had increased in value in the two years she had had
     them.
Be that as it may, the young widow often reminded herself that nothing she had ever bought,
     and nothing that had ever been given her, had caused her such lasting pleasure as her beloved
     string of pearls!
But on this pleasant June afternoon, in deference to her determined friend's advice, she took
     off her pearls before starting out for Montmartre, leaving the case in the charge of M. Girard,
     the genial proprietor of the Hôtel de l'Horloge.
With easy, leisurely steps, constantly stopping to look into the windows of the quaint shops
     they passed on the way, Sylvia Bailey and Anna Wolsky walked up the steep, the almost
     mountainous byways and narrow streets which lead to the top of Montmartre.
The whole population seemed to have poured itself out in the open air on this sunny day; even
     the shopkeepers had brought chairs out of their shops and sat on the pavement, gaily laughing
     and gossiping together in the eager way Parisians have. As the two foreign ladies, both young,
     both in their very different fashion good-looking, walked past the sitting groups of
     neighbours—men, women, and children would stop talking and stare intently at them, as is also a
     Parisian way.
At first Sylvia had disliked the manner in which she was stared at in Paris, and she had been
     much embarrassed as well as a little amused by the very frank remarks called forth in omnibuses
     as well as in the street by the brilliancy of her complexion and the bright beauty of her fair
     hair. But now she was almost used to this odd form of homage, which came quite as often from
     women as from men.
"The Rue Jolie?" answered a cheerful-looking man in answer to a question. "Why, it's ever so
     much further up!" and he vaguely pointed skywards.
And it was much further up, close to the very top of the great hill! In fact, it took the two
     ladies a long time to find it, for the Rue Jolie was the funniest, tiniest little street,
     perched high up on what might almost have been a mountain side.
As for No. 5, Rue Jolie, it was a queer miniature house more like a Swiss châlet than
     anything else, and surrounded by a gay, untidy little garden full of flowers, the kind of
     half-wild, shy, and yet hardy flowers that come up, year after year, without being tended or
     watered.
"Surely a fortune-teller can't live here?" exclaimed Sylvia Bailey, remembering the stately,
     awe-inspiring rooms in which "Pharaoh" received his clients in Bond Street.
"Oh, yes, this is evidently the place!"
Anna Wolsky smiled good-humouredly; she had become extremely fond of the young Englishwoman;
     she delighted in Sylvia's radiant prettiness, her kindly good-temper, and her eager pleasure in
     everything.
A large iron gate gave access to the courtyard which was so much larger than the house built
     round it. But the gate was locked, and a pull at the rusty bell-wire produced no result.
They waited a while. "She must have gone out," said Sylvia, rather disappointed.
But Madame Wolsky, without speaking, again pulled at the rusty wire, and then one of the
     châlet windows was suddenly flung open from above, and a woman—a dark, middle-aged
     Frenchwoman—leant out.
"Qui est là?" and then before either of them could answer, the woman had drawn back:
     a moment later they heard her heavy progress down the creaky stairs of her dwelling.
At last she came out into the courtyard, unlocked the iron gate, and curtly motioned to the
     two ladies to follow her.
"We have come to see Madame Cagliostra," said Sylvia timidly. She took this stout,
     untidily-dressed woman for the fortune-teller's servant.
"Madame Cagliostra, at your service!" The woman turned round, her face breaking into a broad
     smile. She evidently liked the sound of her peculiar name.
They followed her up a dark staircase into a curious little sitting-room. It was scrupulously
     clean, but about it hung the faint odour which the French eloquently describe as "shut in," and
     even on this beautiful hot day the windows were tightly closed.
On the red walls hung various drawings of hands, of hearts, and of heads, and over the plain
     mantelpiece was a really fine pastel portrait of a man, in eighteenth century dress and
     powdered hair.
"My ancestor, Count Cagliostro, ladies!" exclaimed the fat little woman proudly. "As you will
     soon see, if you have, as I venture to suppose, come to consult me, I have inherited the great
     gifts which made Count Cagliostro famous." She waited a moment. "What is it you desire of me?
     Do you wish for the Grand Jeu? Or do you prefer the Crystal?"
Madame Cagliostra gave a shrewd, measuring glance at the two young women standing before her.
     She was wondering how much they were good for.
"No doubt you have been told," she said suddenly, "that my fee is five francs. But if you
     require the Grand Jeu it will be ten francs. Come, ladies, make up your minds; I will give you
     both the Grand Jeu for fifteen francs!"
Sylvia Bailey's lip quivered; she felt a wild wish to burst out laughing. It was all so
     absurd; this funny queer house; this odd, stuffy, empty-looking room; and this vulgar,
     common-looking woman asserting that she was descended from the famous Count Cagliostro! And
     then, to crown everything, the naïve, rather pathetic, attempt to get an extra five francs out
     of them.
But Sylvia was a very kindly, happy-natured creature, and she would not have hurt the
     feelings of even a Madame Cagliostra for the world.
She looked at her friend questioningly. Would it not be better just to give the woman five
     francs and go away? They surely could not expect to hear anything of any value from such a
     person. She was evidently a fraud!
But Anna Wolsky was staring at Madame Cagliostra with a serious look.
"Very well," she exclaimed, in her rather indifferent French. "Very well! We will both take
     the Grand Jeu at fifteen francs the two."
She turned and smiled at Sylvia. "It will be," she said, quaintly, and in English, "my
     'treat,' dear friend." And then, as Sylvia shook her head decidedly—there were often these
     little contests of generosity between the two women—she added rather sharply,
"Yes, yes! It shall be so. I insist! I see you do not believe in our hostess's gift. There
     are, however, one or two questions I must ask, and to which I fancy she can give me an answer.
     I am anxious, too, to hear what she will say about you."
Sylvia smiled, and gave way.
Like most prosperous people who have not made the money they are able to spend, Mrs. Bailey
     did not attach any undue importance to wealth. But she knew that her friend was not as well off
     as herself, and therefore she was always trying to pay a little more of her share than was
     fair. Thanks to Madame Wolsky's stronger will, she very seldom succeeded in doing so.
"We might at least ask her to open the window," she said rather plaintively. It really was
     dreadfully stuffy!
Madame Cagliostra had gone to a sideboard from which she was taking two packs of exceedingly
     dirty, queer-looking cards. They were the famous Taro cards, but Sylvia did not know that.
When the fortune-teller was asked to open the window, she shook her head decidedly.
"No, no!" she said. "It would dissipate the influences. I cannot do that! On the contrary,
     the curtains should be drawn close, and if the ladies will permit of it I will light my
     lamp."
Even as she spoke she was jerking the thick curtains closely together; she even pinned them
     across so that no ray of the bright sunlight outside could penetrate into the room.
For a few moments they were in complete darkness, and Sylvia felt a queer, eerie sensation of
     fear, but this soon passed away as the lamp—the "Suspension," as Madame Cagliostra
     proudly called it—was lit.
When her lamp was well alight, the soothsayer drew three chairs up to the round table, and
     motioned the two strangers to sit down.
"You will take my friend first," said Anna Wolsky, imperiously; and then, to Sylvia, she
     said, in English, "Would you rather I went away, dear? I could wait on the staircase till you
     were ready for me to come back. It is not very pleasant to have one's fortune told when one is
     as young and as pretty as you are, before other people."
"Of course I don't mind your being here!" cried Sylvia Bailey, laughing—then, looking
     doubtfully at Madame Cagliostra, though it was obvious the Frenchwoman did not understand
     English, "The truth is that I should feel rather frightened if you were to leave me here all by
     myself. So please stay."
Madame Cagliostra began dealing out the cards on the table. First slowly, then quickly, she
     laid them out in a queer pattern; and as she did so she muttered and murmured to herself. Then
     a frown came over her face; she began to look disturbed, anxious, almost angry.
Sylvia, in spite of herself, grew interested and excited. She was sorry she had not taken off
     her wedding-ring. In England the wise woman always takes off her wedding-ring on going to see a
     fortune-teller. She was also rather glad that she had left her pearls in the safe custody of M.
     Girard. This little house in the Rue Jolie was a strange, lonely place.
Suddenly Madame Cagliostra began to speak in a quick, clear, monotonous voice.
Keeping her eyes fixed on the cards, which now and again she touched with a fat finger, and
     without looking at Sylvia, she said:
"Madame has led a very placid, quiet life. Her existence has been a boat that has always lain
     in harbour—" She suddenly looked up: "I spent my childhood at Dieppe, and that often suggests
     images to me," she observed complacently, and then she went on in quite another tone of
     voice:—
"To return to Madame and her fate! The boat has always been in harbour, but now it is about
     to put out to sea. It will meet there another craft. This other craft is, to Madame, a foreign
     craft, and I grieve to say it, rather battered. But its timbers are sound, and that is well,
     for it looks to me as if the sails of Madame's boat would mingle, at any rate for a time with
     this battered craft."
"I don't understand what she means," said Sylvia, in a whisper. "Do ask her to explain,
     Anna!"
"My friend asks you to drop metaphor," said the older woman, drily.
The soothsayer fixed her bright, beady little eyes on Sylvia's flushed face.
"Well," she said deliberately, "I see you falling in love, and I also see that falling in
     love is quite a new experience. It burns, it scorches you, does love, Madame. And for awhile
     you do not know what it means, for love has never yet touched you with his red-hot finger."
"How absurd!" thought Sylvia to herself. "She actually takes me for a young girl! What
     ridiculous mistakes fortune-tellers do make, to be sure!"
"—But you cannot escape love," went on Madame Cagliostra, eagerly. "Your fate is a fair man,
     which is strange considering that you also are a fair woman; and I see that there is already a
     dark man in your life."
Sylvia blushed. Bill Chester, just now the only man in her life, was a very dark man.
"But this fair man knows all the arts of love." Madame Cagliostra sighed, her voice softened,
     it became strangely low and sweet. "He will love you tenderly as well as passionately. And as
     for you, Madame—but no, for me to tell you what you will feel and what you will do
     would not be delicate on my part!"
Sylvia grew redder and redder. She tried to laugh, but failed. She felt angry, and not a
     little disgusted.
"You are a foreigner," went on Madame Cagliostra. Her voice had grown hard and expressionless
     again.
Sylvia smiled a little satiric smile.
"But though you are a foreigner," cried the fortune-teller with sudden energy, "it is quite
     possible that you will never go back to your own country! Stop—or, perhaps, I shall say too
     much! Still if you ever do go back, it will be as a stranger. That I say with certainty. And I
     add that I hope with all my heart that you will live to go back to your own country,
     Madame!"
Sylvia felt a vague, uneasy feeling of oppression, almost of fear, steal over her. It seemed
     to her that Madame Cagliostra was looking at her with puzzled, pitying eyes.
The soothsayer again put a fat and not too clean finger down on the upturned face of a
     card.
"There is something here I do not understand; something which I miss when I look at you as I
     am now looking at you. It is something you always wear—"
She gazed searchingly at Sylvia, and her eyes travelled over Mrs. Bailey's neck and
     bosom.
"I see them and yet they are not there! They appear like little balls of light. Surely it is
     a necklace?"
Sylvia looked extremely surprised. Now, at last, Madame Cagliostra was justifying her claim
     to a supernatural gift!
"These balls of light are also your Fate!" exclaimed the woman impetuously. "If you had them
     here—I care not what they be—I should entreat you to give them to me to throw away."
Madame Wolsky began to laugh. "I don't think you would do that," she observed drily.
But Madame Cagliostra did not seem to hear the interruption.
"Have you heard of a mascot?" she said abruptly. "Of a mascot which brings good fortune to
     its wearer?"
Sylvia bent her head. Of course she had heard of mascots.
"Well, if so, you have, of course, heard of objects which bring misfortune to their
     wearers—which are, so to speak, unlucky mascots?"
And this time it was Anna Wolsky who, leaning forward, nodded gravely. She attributed a run
     of bad luck she had had the year before to a trifling gift, twin cherries made of enamel, which
     a friend had given her, in her old home, on her birthday. Till she had thrown that little
     brooch into the sea, she had been persistently unlucky at play.
"Your friend," murmured Madame Cagliostra, now addressing herself to Anna and not to Sylvia,
     "should dispossess herself as quickly as possible of her necklace, of these round balls. They
     have already brought her ill-fortune in the past, they have lowered her in the estimation of an
     estimable person—in fact, if she is not very careful, indeed, even if she be very careful—it
     looks to me, Madame, as if they would end by strangling her!"
Sylvia became very uncomfortable. "Of course she means my pearls," she whispered. "But how
     absurd to say they could ever do me harm."
"Look here," said Anna Wolsky earnestly, "you are quite right, Madame; my friend has a
     necklace which has already played a certain part in her life. But is it not just because of
     this fact that you feel the influence of this necklace so strongly? I entreat you to speak
     frankly. You are really distressing me very much!"
Madame Cagliostra looked very seriously at the speaker.
"Well, perhaps it is so," she said at last. "Of course, we are sometimes wrong in our
     premonitions. And I confess that I feel puzzled—exceedingly puzzled—to-day. I do not know that
     I have ever had so strange a case as that of this English lady before me! I see so many roads
     stretching before her—I also see her going along more than one road. As a rule, one does not
     see this in the cards."
She looked really harassed, really distressed, and was still conning her cards anxiously.
"And yet after all," she cried suddenly, "I may be wrong! Perhaps the necklace has less to do
     with it than I thought! I do not know whether the necklace would make any real difference! If
     she takes one of the roads open to her, then I see no danger at all attaching to the
     preservation of this necklace. But the other road leads straight to the House of Peril."
"The House of Peril?" echoed Sylvia Bailey.
"Yes, Madame. Do you not know that all men and women have their House of Peril—the house
     whose threshold they should never cross—behind whose door lies misery, sometimes
     dishonour?"
"Yes," said Anna Wolsky, "that is true, quite true! There has been, alas! more than one House
     of Peril in my life." She added, "But what kind of place is my friend's House of Peril?"
"It is not a large house," said the fortune-teller, staring down at the shining surface of
     her table. "It is a gay, delightful little place, ladies—quite my idea of a pretty dwelling.
     But it is filled with horror unutterable to Madame. Ah! I entreat you"—she stared sadly at
     Sylvia—"to beware of unknown buildings, especially if you persist in keeping and in wearing
     your necklace."
"Do tell us, Madame, something more about my friend's necklace. Is it, for instance, of great
     value, and is it its value that makes it a source of danger?"
Anna Wolsky wondered very much what would be the answer to this question. She had had her
     doubts as to the genuineness of the pearls her friend wore. Pearls are so exquisitely imitated
     nowadays, and these pearls, if genuine, were of such great value!
At first she had not believed them to be real, then gradually she had become convinced of
     Sylvia's good faith. If the pearls were false, Sylvia did not know it.
But Madame Cagliostra's answer was disappointing—or prudent.
"I cannot tell you that," she said. "I cannot even tell you of what the necklace is composed.
     It may be of gold, of silver, of diamonds, of pearls—it may be, I'm inclined to think it is,
     composed of Egyptian scarabei. They, as you know, often bring terrible ill-fortune in their
     train, especially when they have been taken from the bodies of mummies. But the necklace has
     already caused this lady to quarrel with a very good and sure friend of hers—of that I am sure.
     And, as I tell you, I see in the future that this necklace may cause her very serious
     trouble—indeed, I see it wound like a serpent round her neck, pressing ever tighter and
     tighter—"
She suddenly began shuffling the cards. "And now," she said in a tone of relief, "I will deal
     with you, Madame," and she turned to Anna with a smile.
Sylvia drew her chair a little away from the table.
She felt depressed and uncomfortable. What an odd queer kind of fortune had been told her!
     And then it had all been so muddled. She could scarcely remember what it was that had
     been told her.
Two things, however, remained very clear in her mind: The one was the absurd prediction that
     she might never go back to her own country; the second was all that extraordinary talk about
     her pearls. As to the promised lover, the memory of the soothsayer's words made her feel very
     angry. No doubt Frenchwomen liked that sort of innuendo, but it only disgusted her.
Yet it was really very strange that Madame Cagliostra had known, or rather had divined, that
     she possessed a necklace by which she laid great store. But wasn't there such a thing as
     telepathy? Isn't it supposed by some people that fortune-tellers simply see into the minds of
     those who come to them, and then arrange what they see there according to their fancy?
That, of course, would entirely account for all that the fortune-teller had said about her
     pearls.
Sylvia always felt a little uncomfortable when her pearls were not lying round her pretty
     neck. The first time she had left them in the hotel bureau, at her new friend's request, was
     when they had been together to some place of amusement at night, and she had felt quite
     miserable, quite lost without them. She had even caught herself wondering whether M. Girard was
     perfectly honest, whether she could trust him not to have her dear pearls changed by some
     clever jeweller, though, to be sure, she felt she would have known her string of pearls
     anywhere!
But what was this that was going on between the other two?
Madame Cagliostra dealt out the pack of cards in a slow, deliberate fashion—and then she
     uttered a kind of low hoarse cry, and mixed the cards all together, hurriedly.
Getting up from the table, she exclaimed, "I regret, Madame, that I can tell you
     nothing—nothing at all! I feel ill—very ill!" and, indeed, she had turned, even to Sylvia's
     young and unobservant eyes, terribly pale.
For some moments the soothsayer stood staring into Anna Wolsky's astonished face.
"I know I've disappointed you, Mesdames, but I hope this will not prevent your telling your
     friends of my powers. Allow me to assure you that it is not often that I am taken in this
     way!"
Her voice had dropped to a whisper. She was now gazing down at the pack of cards which lay on
     the table with a look of horror and oppression on her face.
"I will only charge five francs," she muttered at last, "for I know that I have not satisfied
     you."
Sylvia sprang to the window. She tore apart the curtains and pulled up the sash.
"No wonder the poor woman feels faint," she said quickly. "It's absurd to sit with a window
     tight shut in this kind of room, which is little more than a box with three people in it!"
Madame Cagliostra had sunk down into her chair again.
"I must beg you to go away, Mesdames," she muttered, faintly. "Five francs is all I ask of
     you."
But Anna Wolsky was behaving in what appeared to Sylvia a very strange manner. She walked
     round to where the fortune-teller was sitting.
"You saw something in the cards which you do not wish to tell me?" she said imperiously. "I
     do not mind being told the truth. I am not a child."
"I swear I saw nothing!" cried the Frenchwoman angrily. "I am too ill to see anything. The
     cards were to me perfectly blank!"
In the bright sunlight now pouring into the little room the soothsayer looked ghastly, her
     skin had turned a greenish white.
"Mesdames, I beg you to excuse me," she said again. "If you do not wish to give me the five
     francs, I will not exact any fee."
She pointed with a shaking finger to the door, and Sylvia put a five-franc piece down on the
     table.
But before her visitors had quite groped their way to the end of the short, steep staircase,
     they heard a cry.
"Mesdames!" then after a moment's pause, "Mesdames, I implore you to come back!"
They looked at one another, and then Anna, putting her finger to her lips, went back up the
     stairs, alone.
"Well," she said, briefly, "I knew you had something to tell me. What is it?"
"No," said Madame Cagliostra dully. "I must have the other lady here, too. You must both be
     present to hear what I have to say."
Anna went to the door and called out, "Come up Sylvia! She wants to see us both
     together."
There was a thrill of excitement, of eager expectancy in Madame Wolsky's voice; and Sylvia,
     surprised, ran up again into the little room, now full of light, sun, and air.
"Stand side by side," ordered the soothsayer shortly. She stared at them for a moment, and
     then she said with extreme earnestness:—
"I dare not let you go away without giving you a warning. Your two fates are closely
     intertwined. Do not leave Paris for awhile, especially do not leave Paris together. I see you
     both running into terrible danger! If you do go away—and I greatly fear that you will do
     so—then I advise you, together and separately, to return to Paris as soon as possible."
"One question I must ask of you," said Anna Wolsky urgently. "How goes my luck? You know what
     I mean? I play!"
"It is not your luck that is threatened," replied the fortune-teller, solemnly; "on the
     contrary, I see wonderful luck; packets of bank-notes and rouleaux of gold! It is not your
     luck—it is something far, far more important that is in peril. Something which means far more
     to you even than your luck!"
The Polish woman smiled rather sadly.
"I wonder what that can be?" she exclaimed.
"It is your life!"
"My life?" echoed Anna. "I do not know that I value my life as much as you think I do."
"The English have a proverb, Madame, which says: 'A short life and a merry one.'"
"Can you predict that I shall have, if a short life, then a merry one?"
"Yes," said Madame Cagliostra, "that I can promise you." But there was no smile on her pale
     face. "And more, I can predict—if you will only follow my advice, if you do not leave Paris
     for, say"—she hesitated a moment, as if making a silent calculation—"twelve weeks, I can
     predict you, if not so happy a life, then a long life and a fairly merry one. Will you take my
     advice, Madame?" she went on, almost threateningly. "Believe me, I do not often offer advice to
     my clients. It is not my business to do so. But I should have been a wicked woman had I not
     done so this time. That is why I called you back."
"Is it because of something you have seen in the cards that you tender us this advice?" asked
     Anna curiously.
But Madame Cagliostra again looked strangely frightened.
"No, no!" she said hastily. "I repeat that the cards told me nothing. The cards were a blank.
     I could see nothing in them. But, of course, we do not only tell fortunes by cards"—she spoke
     very quickly and rather confusedly. "There is such a thing as a premonition."
She waited a moment, and then, in a business-like tone, added, "And now I leave the question
     of the fee to the generosity of these ladies!"
Madame Wolsky smiled a little grimly, and pulled out a twenty-franc piece.
The woman bowed, and murmured her thanks.
When they were out again into the roughly paved little street, Anna suddenly began to
     laugh.
"Now, isn't that a typical Frenchwoman? She really did feel ill, she really saw nothing in my
     cards, and, being an honest woman, she did not feel that she could ask us to pay! Then, when we
     had gone away, leaving only five francs, her thrift got the better of her honesty; she felt she
     had thrown away ten good francs! She therefore called us back, and gave us what she took to be
     very excellent advice. You see, I had told her that I am a gambler. She knows, as we all know,
     that to play for money is a foolish thing to do. She is aware that in Paris it is not very easy
     for a stranger to obtain admittance—especially if that stranger be a respectable woman—to a
     gambling club. She therefore said to herself, 'I will give this lady far more than ten francs'
     worth of advice. I will tell her not to go away! As long as she remains in Paris she cannot
     lose her money. If she goes to Dieppe, Trouville, any place where there is a Casino, she will
     lose her money. Therefore I am giving her invaluable advice—worth far more than the ten francs
     which she ought to be made to give me, and which she shall be made to give me!'"
"I suppose you are right," said Sylvia thoughtfully. "And yet—and yet—she certainly spoke
     very seriously, did she not, Anna? She seemed quite honestly—in fact, terribly afraid that we
     should go away together."
"But there is no idea of our going away together," said Madame Wolsky, rather crossly. "I
     only wish there were! You are going on to Switzerland to join your friends, and as for me, in
     spite of Madame Cagliostra's mysterious predictions, I shall, of course, go to some place—I
     think it will be Dieppe (I like the Dieppe Casino the best)—where I can play. And the memory of
     you, my dear little English friend, will be my mascot. You heard her say that I should be
     fortunate—that I should have an extraordinary run of good fortune?"
"Yes," said Sylvia, "but do not forget"—she spoke with a certain gravity; death was a very
     real thing to her, for she had seen in the last two years two deathbeds, that of her father,
     that of her husband—"do not forget, Anna, that she told you you would not live long if you went
     away."
"She was quite safe in saying that to me," replied the other hastily. "People who play—those
     who get the gambling fever into their system when they are still young—do not, as a rule, live
     very long. Their emotions are too strong, too often excited! Play should be reserved for the
     old—the old get so quickly deadened, they do not go through the terrible moments younger people
     do!"
On the morning after her visit to Madame Cagliostra, Sylvia Bailey woke later than usual. She
     had had a disturbed night, and it was pleasant to feel that she could spend a long restful day
     doing nothing, or only taking part in one of the gay little expeditions which make Paris to a
     stranger the most delightful of European capitals.
She opened wide both the windows of her room, and from outside there floated in a busy, happy
     murmur, for Paris is an early city, and nine o'clock there is equivalent to eleven o'clock in
     London.
She heard the picturesque street cries of the flower-sellers in the Avenue de
     l'Opéra—"Beflower yourselves, gentlemen and ladies, beflower yourselves!"
The gay, shrill sounds floated in to her, and, in spite of her bad night and ugly dreams, she
     felt extraordinarily well and happy.
Cities are like people. In some cities one feels at home at once; others remain, however well
     acquainted we become with them, always strangers.
Sylvia Bailey, born, bred, married, widowed in an English provincial town, had always felt
     strange in London. But with Paris,—dear, delightful, sunny Paris,—she had become on the
     closest, the most affectionately intimate terms from the first day. She had only been here a
     month, and yet she already knew with familiar knowledge the quarter in which was situated her
     quiet little hotel, that wonderful square mile—it is not more—which has as its centre the Paris
     Opera House, and which includes the Rue de la Paix and the beginning of each of the great
     arteries of modern Paris.
And that was not all. Sylvia Bailey knew something of the France of the past. The quiet,
     clever, old-fashioned Frenchwoman by whom she had been educated had seen to that. She could
     wander through the narrow streets on the other side of the Seine, and reconstitute the amazing,
     moving, tragic things which happened there during the great Revolution.
She was now half sorry to think that in ten days or so she had promised to join some
     acquaintances in Switzerland. Luckily her trustee and would-be lover, Bill Chester, proposed to
     come out and join the party there. That was something to look forward to, for Sylvia was very
     fond of him, though he sometimes made her angry by his fussy ways. Chester had not approved of
     her going to Paris by herself, and he would certainly have shaken his head had he known of
     yesterday's visit to Madame Cagliostra.
And then Sylvia Bailey began to think of her new friend: of Anna Wolsky. She was sorry, very
     sorry, that they were going to part so soon. If only Anna would consent to come on with her to
     Switzerland! But alas! there was no chance of that, for there are no Casinos, no gambling, in
     the land of William Tell.
There came a knock at the door, and Madame Wolsky walked in. She was dressed for a
     journey.
"I have to go out of town this morning," she said, "but the place I am going to is quite
     near, and I shall be back this afternoon."
"Where are you going?" asked Sylvia, naïvely. "Or is it a secret?"
"No, it is not a secret." Anna smiled provokingly. "I am going to go to a place called
     Lacville. I do not suppose you have ever heard of Lacville, Sylvia?"
The other shook her head.
"I thought not," cried Anna, suddenly bursting out laughing. Then, "Good-bye!" she exclaimed,
     and she was gone before Sylvia could say anything else.
Lacville? There had been a sparkle, a look of life, of energy in Anna's face. Why was Anna
     Wolsky going to Lacville? There was something about the place concerning which she had chosen
     to be mysterious, and yet she had made no secret of going there.
Mrs. Bailey jumped out of bed, and dressed rather more quickly than usual.
It was a very hot day. In fact, it was unpleasantly hot. How delightful it would be to get
     into the country even for an hour. Why should she not also make her way to Lacville?
She opened the "Guide-Book to Paris and its Environs," of which she had made such good use in
     the last month, and looked up "Lacville" in the index.
Situated within a drive of the beautiful Forest of Montmorency, the pretty little town of
      Lacville is still famed for its healing springs and during the summer months of the year is
      much frequented by Parisians. There are frequent trains from the Gare du Nord.
No kind fairy whispered the truth to Sylvia—namely that this account is only half, nay, a
     quarter, or an eighth, of the truth.
Lacville is the spendthrift, the gambler—the austere would call her the chartered
     libertine—of the group of pretty country towns which encircle Paris; for Lacville is in the
     proud possession of a Gambling Concession which has gradually turned what was once the quietest
     of inland watering-places into a miniature Monte Carlo.
The vast majority of intelligent, cultivated English and American visitors to Paris remain
     quite unaware that there is, within half an hour of the French capital, such a spot; the
     minority, those tourists who do make their way to the alluring little place, generally live to
     regret it.
But Sylvia knew nothing, nay, less than nothing, of all this, and even if she had known, it
     would not have stayed her steps to-day.
She put on her hat and hurried down to the office. There M. Girard would doubtless tell her
     of a good train to Lacville, and if it were a small place she might easily run across Anna
     Wolsky.
M. Girard was a very busy man, yet he always found time for a talk with any foreign client of
     his hotel.
"I want to know," said Sylvia, smiling in spite of herself, for the hotel-keeper was such a
     merry-looking little man, and so utterly different from any English hotel-keeper she had ever
     seen!—"I want to know, M. Girard, which is the best way to a place called Lacville? Have you
     ever been there?"
"Lacville?" echoed M. Girard delightedly; but there came a rather funny look over his shrewd,
     round face. "Yes, indeed, I have been there, Madame! Not this season yet, but often last
     summer, and I shall be going there shortly again. I have a friend there—indeed, he is more than
     a friend, he is a relation of mine, who keeps the most select hotel at Lacville. It is called
     the Villa du Lac. Is Madame thinking of going to Lacville instead of to Switzerland?"
Sylvia shook her head. "Oh, no! But Madame Wolsky is there to-day, and I should have gone
     with her if I had been ready when she came down. It has turned so hot that I feel a few hours
     in the country would be pleasant, and I am quite likely to meet her, for I suppose Lacville is
     not a very large place, M. Girard?"
The hotel-keeper hesitated; he found it really difficult to give a true answer to this simple
     question.
"Lacville?" he repeated; "well—Dame! Lacville is Lacville! It is not like anything Madame has
     ever seen. On that I would lay my life. First, there is a most beautiful lake—that is, perhaps,
     the principal attraction;—then the villas of Lacville—ah! they are ravishingly lovely, and then
     there is also"—he fixed his black eyes on her—"a Casino."
"A Casino?" echoed Sylvia. She scarcely knew what a Casino was.
"But to see the Casino properly Madame must go at night, and it would be well if Madame were
     accompanied by a gentleman. I do not think Madame should go by herself, but if Madame really
     desires to see Lacville properly my wife and I will make a great pleasure to ourselves to
     accompany her there one Sunday night. It is very gay, is Lacville on Sunday night—or, perhaps,"
     added M. Girard quickly, "Madame, being English, would prefer a Saturday night? Lacville is
     also very gay on Saturday nights."
"But is there anything going on there at night?" asked Sylvia, astonished. "I thought
     Lacville was a country place."
"There are a hundred and twenty trains daily from the Gare du Nord to Lacville," said the
     hotel-keeper drily. "A great many Parisians spend the evening there each day. They do not start
     till nine o'clock in the evening, and they are back, having spent a very pleasant, or sometimes
     an unpleasant, soirée, before midnight."
"A hundred and twenty trains!" repeated Sylvia, amazed. "But why do so many people want to go
     to Lacville?"
Again the hotel-keeper stared at her with a questioning look. Was it possible that pretty
     Madame Bailey did not know what was the real attraction of Lacville? Yet it was not his
     business to run the place down—as a matter of fact, he and his wife had invested nearly a
     thousand pounds of their hard-earned savings in their relation's hotel, the Villa du Lac. If
     Madame Bailey really wanted to leave salubrious, beautiful Paris for the summer, why should she
     not go to Lacville instead of to dull, puritanical, stupid Switzerland?
These thoughts rushed through the active brain of M. Girard with amazing quickness.
"Many people go to Lacville in order to play baccarat," he said lightly.
And then Sylvia knew why Anna Wolsky had gone to Lacville.
"But apart from the play, Lacville is a little paradise, Madame," he went on
     enthusiastically. "It is a beauteous spot, just like a scene in an opera. There is the romantic
     lake, edged with high, shady trees and princely villas—and then the gay, the delightful
     Casino!"
"And is there a train soon?"
"I will look Madame out a train this moment, and I will also give her one of my cousin
     Polperro's cards. Madame has, of course, heard of the Empress Eugénie? Well, the Villa du Lac
     once belonged to one of the Empress's gentlemen-in-waiting. The very highest nobility stay at
     the Villa du Lac with my cousin. At this very moment he has Count Paul de Virieu, the
     brother-in-law of a duke, among his clients—"
M. Girard had noticed the British fondness for titles.
"You see, Madame, my cousin was chef to the Emperor of Brazil's sister—this has given him a
     connection among the nobility. In the winter he has an hotel at Mentone," he was looking up the
     train while he chatted happily.
"There is a train every ten minutes," he said at last, "from the Gare du Nord. Or, if Madame
     prefers it, she could walk up from here to the Square of the Trinité and take the tramway; but
     it is quicker and pleasanter to go by train—unless, indeed, Madame wishes to offer herself the
     luxury of an automobile. That, alas! I fear would cost Madame twenty to thirty francs."
"Of course I will go by train," said Sylvia, smiling, "and I will lunch at your cousin's
     hotel, M. Girard."
It would be quite easy to find Anna, or so she thought, for Anna would be at the Casino.
     Sylvia felt painfully interested in her friend's love of gambling. It was so strange that Anna
     was not ashamed of it.
And then as she drove to the great railway terminus, from which a hundred and twenty trains
     start daily for Lacville, it seemed to Sylvia that the whole of Paris was placarded with the
     name of the place she was now about to visit for the first time!
On every hoarding, on every bare piece of wall, were spread large, flamboyant posters showing
     a garish but not unattractive landscape. There was the sun sparkling on a wide stretch of water
     edged with high trees, and gay with little sailing boats, each boat with its human freight of
     two lovers. Jutting out into the blue lake was a great white building, which Sylvia realised
     must be the Casino. And under each picture ran the words "Lacville-les-Bains" printed in very
     black letters.
When she got to the Gare du Nord the same advertisement stared down at her from the walls of
     the station and of the waiting-rooms.
It was certainly odd that she had never heard of Lacville, and that the place had never been
     mentioned to her by any of those of her English acquaintances who thought they knew Paris so
     well.
The Lacville train was full of happy, chattering people. In her first-class carriage she had
     five fellow-travellers—a man and woman and three children. They looked cheerful, prosperous
     people, and soon the husband and wife began talking eagerly together.
"I really think," said the lady suddenly, "that we might have chosen some other place than
     Lacville in which to spend to-day! There are many places the children would have enjoyed
     more."
"But there is no place," said her husband in a jovial tone, "where I can spend an amusing
     hour in the afternoon."
"Ah, my friend, I feared that was coming!" exclaimed his wife, shaking her head. "But
     remember what happened the last time we were at Lacville—I mean the afternoon when you lost
     seventy francs!"
"But you forget that other afternoon!" answered the man eagerly. "I mean the afternoon when I
     made a hundred francs, and bought you and the children a number of delightful little gifts with
     the money!"
Sylvia was amused. How quaint and odd French people were! She could not imagine such an
     interchange of words between an English husband and wife, especially before a stranger. And
     then her amusement was further increased, for the youngest child, a boy of about six, cried out
     that he also wished to go to the Casino with his dear papa.
"No, no, my sweet cabbage, that will happen quite soon enough, when thou art older! If thou
     art in the least like thy father, there will certainly come a time when thou also wilt go and
     lose well-earned money at the Tables," said his mother tenderly.
"But if I win, then I shall buy thee a present," said the sweet cabbage coaxingly.
Sylvia looked out of the window. These happy, chattering people made her feel lonely, and
     even a little depressed.
The country through which the train was passing was very flat and ugly—in fact, it could
     scarcely be called country at all. And when at last they drew up into the large station of what
     was once a quiet, remote village where Parisian invalids, too poor to go elsewhere, came to
     take medicinal waters, she felt a pang of disappointment. Lacville, as seen from the railway,
     is an unattractive place.
"Is this Madame's first visit to Lacville?" asked her fellow-traveller, helping her out of
     the railway carriage. "If so, Madame would doubtless like to make her way to the lake. Would
     she care to accompany us thither?"
Sylvia hesitated. She almost felt inclined to go back to Paris by the next train. She told
     herself that there was no hope of finding Anna in such a large place, and that it was unlikely
     that this dreary-looking town would offer anything in the least pleasant or amusing on a very
     hot day.
But "It will be enchanting by the lake!" she heard some one say eagerly. And this chance
     remark made up her mind for her. After all, she might as well go and see the lake, of which
     everyone who mentioned Lacville spoke so enthusiastically.
Down the whole party swept along a narrow street, bordered by high white houses, shabby
     cafés, and little shops. Quite a crowd had left the station, and they were all now going the
     same way.
A turn in the narrow street, and Sylvia uttered a low cry of pleasure and astonishment!
Before her, like a scene in a play when the curtain is rung up, there suddenly appeared an
     immense sunlit expanse of water, fringed by high trees, and bordered by quaint, pretty châlets
     and villas, fantastic in shape, and each surrounded by a garden, which in many cases ran down
     to the edge of the lake.
To the right, stretching out over the water, its pinnacles and minarets reflected in blue
     translucent depths, rose what looked like a great white marble palace.
"Is it not lovely?" said the Frenchman eagerly. "And the water of the lake is so shallow,
     Madame, there is no fear of anyone being drowned in it! That is such an advantage when one has
     children."
"And it is a hundred times more charming in the afternoon," his wife chimed in, happily, "for
     then the lake is so full of little sailing-boats that you can hardly see the water. Oh, it is
     gay then, very gay!"
She glanced at Mrs. Bailey's pretty grey muslin dress and elegant parasol.
"I suppose Madame is going to one of the great restaurants? As for us, we shall make our way
     into a wood and have our luncheon there. It is expensive going to a restaurant with
     children."
She nodded pleasantly, with the easy, graceful familiarity which foreigners show in their
     dealings with strangers; and, shepherding their little party along, the worthy pair went
     briskly off by the broad avenue which girdles the lake.
Again Sylvia felt curiously alone. She was surrounded on every side by groups of
     merry-looking people, and already out on the lake there floated tiny white-sailed boats, each
     containing a man and a girl.
Everyone seemed to have a companion or companions; she alone was solitary. She even found
     herself wondering what she was doing there in a foreign country, by herself, when she might
     have been in England, in her own pleasant house at Market Dalling!
She took out of her bag the card which the landlord of the Hôtel de l'Horloge had pressed
     upon her. "Hôtel Pension, Villa du Lac, Lacville."
She went up rather timidly to a respectable-looking old bourgeois and his wife. "Do you
     know," she asked, "where is the Villa du Lac?"
"Certainly, Madame," answered the old man amiably. "It is there, close to you, not a hundred
     yards away. That big white house to our left." And then, with that love of giving information
     which possesses so many Frenchman, he added:
"The Villa du Lac once belonged to the Marquis de Para, who was gentleman-in-waiting to the
     Empress Eugénie. He and his family lived on here long after the war, in fact"—he lowered his
     voice—"till the Concession was granted to the Casino. You know what I mean? The Gambling
     Concession. Since then the world of Lacville has become rather mixed, as I have reason to know,
     for my wife and I have lived here fifteen years. The Marquis de Para sold his charming villa.
     He was driven away, like so many other excellent people. So the Villa du Lac is now an hotel,
     where doubtless Madame has friends?"
Sylvia bowed and thanked him. Yes, the Villa du Lac even now looked like a delightful and
     well-kept private house, rather than like an hotel. It stood some way back—behind high
     wrought-steel and gilt gates—from the sandy road which lay between it and the lake, and the
     stone-paved courtyard was edged with a line of green tubs, containing orange trees.
Sylvia walked through the gates, which stood hospitably open, and when she was half-way up
     the horseshoe stone-staircase which led to the front door, a man, dressed in the white dress of
     a French chef, and bearing an almost ludicrous resemblance to M. Girard, came hurrying out.
"Madame Bailey?" he exclaimed joyously, and bowing very low. "Have I the honour of greeting
     Madame Bailey? My cousin telephoned to me that you might be coming, Madame, to déjeuner!" And
     as Sylvia smiled in assent: "I am delighted, I am honoured, by the visit of Madame Bailey!"
Sylvia laughed outright. She really could not help it! It was very nice and thoughtful of M.
     Girard to have telephoned to his cousin. But how dreadful it would have been if she had gone
     straight back to Paris from the station. All these kind people would have had their trouble for
     nothing.
M. Polperro was a shrewd Southerner, and he had had the sense to make but few alterations to
     the Villa du Lac. It therefore retained something of the grand air it had worn in the days when
     it had been the property of a Court official. The large, cool, circular hall into which the
     hotel-keeper ushered Sylvia was charming, as were the long, finely decorated reception-rooms on
     either side.
The dining-room, filled with small oval tables, to which M. Polperro next led his honoured
     guest, had been built out since the house had become an hotel. It commanded a view of the lake
     on the one side, and of the large, shady garden of the villa on the other.
"I have arranged for Madame a little table in what we call the lake window," observed M.
     Polperro. "As yet Lacville is very empty. Paris is so delightful," he sighed, "but very soon,
     when the heat comes, Lacville will be quite full," he smiled joyously. "I myself have a very
     choice clientèle—I do not deal with rubbish." He drew himself up proudly. "My clients come back
     to me year after year. Already I have six visitors, and in ten days my pension will be au
      grand complet. It is quality, not quantity, that I desire, Madame. If ever you know
     anyone who wishes to come to Lacville you may safely recommend them—I say it with my hands on
     my heart," and he suited his action to his words—"to the Villa du Lac."
How delightful it all was to Sylvia Bailey! No wonder her feeling of depression and
     loneliness vanished.
As she sat down, and looked out of the bay window which commanded the whole length of the
     gleaming, sun-flecked lake, she told herself that, pleasant as was Paris, Lacville on a hot day
     was certainly a hundred times pleasanter than Paris.
And the Casino? Sylvia fixed her blue eyes on the white, fairy-like group of buildings, which
     were so attractive an addition to the pretty landscape.
Surely one might spend a pleasant time at Lacville and never play for money? Though she was
     inclined to feel that in this matter of gambling English people are curiously narrow. It was
     better to be philosophical about it, like that excellent Frenchwoman in the train, who had not
     grudged her husband a little amusement, even if it entailed his losing what she had described
     as "hard-earned money."
Though she had to wait nearly half an hour for her meal, the time passed quickly; and when at
     last déjeuner was served to her well and deftly by a pleasant-faced young waitress dressed in
     Breton costume, each item of the carefully-prepared meal was delicious. M. Polperro had not
     been chef to a Princess for nothing.
Sylvia Bailey was not greedy, but like most healthy people she enjoyed good food, and she had
     very seldom tasted quite such good food as that which was served to her at the Hôtel du Lac on
     this memorable June day.
She had almost finished her luncheon when a fair young man came in and sat down at a small
     table situated at the other end of the dining-room, close to the window overlooking the garden
     of the Villa du Lac.
As the young man came into the dining-room he glanced over to where Mrs. Bailey was sitting
     and then he looked away, and, unfolding his table napkin, paid no more attention to the only
     other occupant of the room.
Now this was a very trifling fact, and yet it surprised our young Englishwoman; she had
     become accustomed to the way in which Frenchmen, or perhaps it would be more true to say
     Parisians, stare at a pretty woman in the streets, in omnibuses, and in shops. As for the
     dining-room of the Hôtel de l'Horloge, it always seemed full of eyes when she and Anna Wolsky
     were having lunch or dinner there.
Now, for the first time, she found herself close to a Frenchman without feeling either
     uncomfortably or amusingly aware of a steady, unwinking stare. It was quite an odd sensation to
     find herself thus neglected!
Without actually looking round, Sylvia, out of the corner of her blue eye, could see this
     exceptional Frenchman. He was dressed in white flannels, and he wore rather bright pink socks
     and a pink tie to match. He must be, she decided, something of a dandy. Though still a young
     man, he was rather bald, and he had a thick fair moustache. He looked bored and very grave; she
     could not help wondering why he was staying at Lacville.
M. Polperro suddenly appeared at the door. "Would M. le Comte prefer scrambled eggs or an
     omelette?" he asked obsequiously, and "M. le Comte" lifted his head and answered shortly, but
     with a smile, "Scrambled eggs, my good Polperro."
Doubtless this was the gentleman who was brother-in-law of the French Duke mentioned by M.
     Girard. He spoke to the chef with the kindly familiarity born of long knowledge.
After having given the Count his scrambled eggs, the young waitress came over to where Sylvia
     was sitting. "Would Madame like to have her coffee in the garden?" she asked; and Sylvia said
     that she would.
How enchanting was the garden of the Villa du Lac, and how unlike any hotel garden she had
     ever seen! The smooth, wide lawn was shaded with noble cedars and bright green chestnut trees;
     it was paradise compared with the rather stuffy little Hôtel de l'Horloge and the dusty Paris
     streets.
M. Polperro himself brought Sylvia's coffee. Then he stayed on talking to her, for like all
     clever hotel-keepers the Southerner had the gift of making those who were staying in his house
     feel as if they were indeed his guests rather than his clients.
"If Madame should ever care to make a little stay at Lacville, how happy Madame Polperro and
     I would be!" he exclaimed. "I have a beautiful room overlooking the lake which I could give
     Madame. It was reserved for a Russian Princess, but now she is not coming—"
"Perhaps I will come and stay here some day," said Sylvia, and she really felt as if she
     would like to come and stay in the Villa du Lac. "But I am going to Switzerland next week, so
     it will have to be the next time I come to France in the summer."
"Does Madame play?" asked M. Polperro, insinuatingly.
"I?" said Sylvia, laughing. "No, indeed! Of course, I play bridge—all English people play
     bridge—but I have never gambled, if you mean that, monsieur, in my life."
"I am delighted to hear Madame say so," said M. Polperro, heartily. "People now talk of
     Lacville as if there was only the Casino and the play. They forget the beautiful walks, the
     lovely lake, and the many other attractions we have to offer! Why, Madame, think of the Forest
     of Montmorency? In old days it was quite a drive from Lacville, but now a taxi or an automobile
     will get you there in a few minutes! Still the Casino is very attractive too; and all
      my clients belong to the Club!"
Sylvia stayed on for nearly an hour in the delightful, peaceful garden, and then, rather
     regretfully, she went up the lichen-covered steps which led into the hall. How deliciously cool
     and quiet it was there.
She paid her bill; it seemed very moderate considering how good her lunch had been, and then
     slowly made her way out of the Villa du Lac, down across the stone-flagged courtyard to the
     gate, and so into the sanded road.
Crossing over, she began walking by the edge of the lake; and once more loneliness fell upon
     her. The happy-looking people who passed her laughing and talking together, and the more silent
     couples who floated by on the water in the quaint miniature sailing boats with which the
     surface of the lake was now dotted, were none of them alone.
Suddenly the old parish church of Lacville chimed out the hour—it was only one
     o'clock—amazingly early still!
Someone coming across the road lifted his hat. Could it be to her? Yes, for it was the young
     man who had shared with her, for a time, the large dining-room of the Villa du Lac.
Again Sylvia was struck by what she could only suppose were the stranger's good manners, for
     instead of staring at her, as even the good-humoured bourgeois with whom she had travelled from
     Paris that morning had done, the Count—she remembered he was a Count—turned sharply to the
     right and walked briskly along to the turning which led to the Casino.
The Casino? Why, of course, it was there that she must look for Anna Wolsky. How stupid of
     her not to have thought of it! And so, after waiting a moment, she also joined the little
     string of people who were wending their way towards the great white building.
After having paid a franc for admission, Sylvia found herself in the hall of the Casino of
     Lacville. An eager attendant rushed forward to relieve her of the dust-cloak and parasol which
     she was carrying.
"Does Madame wish to go straight to the Room of the Games?" he inquired eagerly.
Sylvia bent her head. It was there, or so she supposed, that Anna would be.
Feeling a thrill of keen curiosity, she followed the man through a prettily-decorated
     vestibule, and so into a large room, overlooking the lake, where already a crowd of people were
     gathered round the green baize tables.
The Salle des Jeux at Lacville is a charming, conservatory-like apartment, looking, indeed,
     as if it were actually built out on the water.
But none of the people were looking at the beautiful scene outside. Instead, each group was
     intent on the table, and on the game being played thereon—a game, it may be mentioned, which
     has a certain affinity with Roulette and Petits Chevaux, though it is neither the one nor the
     other.
Sylvia looked about her timidly; but no one took the slightest notice of her, and this in
     itself was rather strange. She was used to exciting a good deal of attention wherever she went
     in France, but here, at Lacville, everyone seemed blind to her presence. It was almost as if
     she were invisible! In a way this was a relief to her; but at the same time, she found it
     curiously disconcerting.
She walked slowly round each gambling table, keeping well outside the various circles of
     people sitting and standing there.
Strange to say Anna Wolsky was not among them. Of that fact Sylvia soon became quite
     sure.
At last a servant in livery came up to her. "Does Madame want a seat?" he asked officiously.
     "If so, I can procure Madame a seat in a very few moments."
But Sylvia, blushing, shook her head. She certainly had no wish to sit down.
"I only came in to look for a friend," she said, hesitatingly; "but my friend is not
     here."
And she was making her way out of the Salle des Jeux, feeling rather disconsolate and
     disappointed, when suddenly, in the vestibule, she saw Madame Wolsky walking towards her in the
     company of a middle-aged man.
"Then that is settled?" Sylvia heard Anna say in her indifferent French. "You will fill up
     all the formalities, and by the time I arrive the card of membership will be ready for me? This
     kind of thing"—she waved her hand towards the large room Sylvia had just left—"is no use to me
     at all! I only like le Grand Jeu"; and a slight smile came over her dark face.
The man who was with her laughed as if she had made a good joke; then bowing, he left
     her.
"Sylvia!"
"Anna!"
Mrs. Bailey fancied that the other was not particularly sorry to have been followed.
"So you came after me? Well! Well! I never should have thought to have seen my dear Puritan,
     Sylvia Bailey, in such a place as the Casino of Lacville?" said the Polish lady laughing.
     "However, as you are here, let us enjoy ourselves. Would you like to risk a few francs?"
Together they had gone back into the Salle des Jeux, and Anna drew Sylvia towards the nearest
     table.
"This is a child's game!" she exclaimed, contemptuously. "I cannot understand how all these
     clever Parisians can care to come out here and lose their money every Saturday and Sunday, to
     say nothing of other days!"
"But I suppose some of these people make money?" questioned Sylvia. She thought she saw a
     great deal of money being won, as well as lost, on the green cloth of the table before her.
"Oh yes, no doubt a few may make money at this game! But I have just been arranging, with the
     aid of the owner of the Pension where I am going to stay when I come here, to join the
     Club."
And then, realising that Sylvia did not understand, she went on.
"You see, my dear child, there are two kinds of play here—as there are, indeed, at almost
     every Casino in France. There is this game, which is, as I say, a child's game—a game
     at which you can make or lose a few francs; and then there is Baccarat!"
She waited a moment.
"Yes?" said Sylvia questioningly.
"Baccarat is played here in what they call the Club, in another part of the building. As
     there is an entrance fee to the Club, there is never such a crowd in the Baccarat Room as there
     is here. And those who belong to the Club 'mean business,' as they say in your dear country.
     They come, that is, to play in the way that I understand and that I enjoy play!"
A little colour rose to Anna Wolsky's sallow cheeks; she looked exhilarated, excited at the
     thoughts and memories her words conjured up.
Sylvia also felt curiously excited. She found the scene strangely fascinating—the scene
     presented by this crowd of eager men and women, each and all absorbed in this mysterious game
     which looked anything but a child's game, though Anna had called it so.
But as they were trying to make their way through the now dense crowd of people, the
     middle-aged man who had been with Anna when Sylvia had first seen her just now hurried up to
     them.
"Everything is arranged, Madame!" he exclaimed. "Here is your membership card. May I have the
     pleasure of taking you myself to the Club? Your friend can come too. She does not want to play,
     does she?"
He looked inquisitively at Sylvia, and his hard face softened. He had your true Frenchman's
     pleasure in charm and beauty. "Madame, or is it Mademoiselle?—"
"Madame!" answered Anna, smiling.
"—Madame can certainly come in and look on for a few moments, even though she be not a member
     of the Club."
They turned and followed him up a broad, shallow staircase, into a part of the Casino where
     the very atmosphere seemed different from that surrounding the public gaming tables.
Here, in the Club, all was hushed and quiet, and underfoot was a thick carpet.
There were very few people in the Baccarat Room, some twelve men, and four or five ladies who
     were broken up into groups, and talking with one another in the intimate, desultory fashion in
     which people talk who meet daily in pursuit of some common interest or hobby.
And then, all at once, Sylvia Bailey saw that among them, but standing a little apart, was
     the Count—was not his name de Virieu?
He turned round, and as he saw her she thought that a look of surprise, almost of annoyance,
     flitted over his impassive face. Then he moved away from where he could see her.
A peculiar-looking old gentleman, who seemed on kindly terms with everyone in the room,
     pulled a large turnip watch out of his pocket. "It is nearly half-past one!" he exclaimed
     fussily. "Surely, it is time that we began! Who takes the Bank to-day?"
"I will," said the Comte de Virieu, coming forward.
Five minutes later play was in full swing. Sylvia did not in the least understand the game of
     Baccarat, and she would have been surprised indeed had she been told that the best account of
     it ever written is that which describes it as "neither a recreation nor an intellectual
     exercise, but simply a means for the rapid exchange of money well suited to persons of
     impatient temperament."
With fascinated eyes, Sylvia watched Anna put down her gold pieces on the green cloth. Then
     she noted the cards as they were dealt out, and listened, it must be admitted,
     uncomprehendingly, to the mysterious words which told how the game was going. Still she
     sympathised very heartily with her friend when Anna's gold pieces were swept away, and she
     rejoiced as heartily when gold was added to Anna's little pile.
They both stood, refusing the seats which were pressed upon them.
Suddenly Sylvia Bailey, looking up from the green cloth, saw the eyes of the man who held the
     Bank fixed full upon her.
The Comte de Virieu did not gaze at the young English woman with the bold, impersonal stare
     to which she had become accustomed—his glance was far more thoughtful, questioning, and in a
     sense kindly. But his eyes seemed to pierce her through and through, and suddenly her heart
     began to beat very fast. Yet no colour came into her face—indeed, Sylvia grew pale.
She looked down at the table, but even so she remained conscious of that piercing gaze turned
     on her, and with some surprise she found herself keenly visualising the young man's face.
Alone among all the people in the room, the Comte de Virieu looked as if he lived a more or
     less outdoor life; his face was tanned, his blue eyes were very bright, and the hands dealing
     out the cards were well-shaped and muscular. Somehow he looked very different, she could hardly
     explain how or why, from the men round him.
At last she moved round, so as to avoid being opposite to him.
Yes, she felt more comfortable now, and slowly, almost insensibly, the glamour of play began
     to steal over Sylvia Bailey's senses. She began to understand the at once very simple and, to
     the uninitiated, intricate game of Baccarat—to long, as Anna Wolsky longed, for the fateful
     nine, eight, five, and four to be turned up.
She had fifty francs in her purse, and she ached to risk a gold piece.
"Do you think I might put down ten francs?" she whispered to Anna.
And the other laughed, and exclaimed, "Yes, of course you can!"
Sylvia put down a ten-franc piece, and a moment later it had become twenty francs.
"Leave it on," murmured Anna, "and see what happens—"
Sylvia followed her friend's advice, and a larger gold piece was added to the two already
     there.
She took up the forty francs with a curious thrill of joy and fear.
But then an untoward little incident took place. One of the liveried men-servants stepped
     forward. "Has Madame got her card of membership?" he inquired smoothly.
Sylvia blushed painfully. No, she had not got a card of membership—and there had been an
     implied understanding that she was only to look on, not play.
She felt terribly ashamed—a very unusual feeling for Sylvia Bailey—and the gold pieces she
     held in her hand, for she had not yet put them in her purse, felt as if they burnt her.
But she found a friend, a defender in an unexpected quarter. The Count rose from the table.
     He said a few words in a low tone to the servant, and the man fell back.
"Of course, this young lady may play," he addressed Anna, "and as Banker I wish her all good
     luck! This is probably her first and her last visit to Lacville." He smiled pleasantly, and a
     little sadly. Sylvia noticed that he had a low, agreeable voice.
"Take her away, Madame, when she has won a little more! Do not give her time to lose what she
     has won."
He spoke exactly as if Sylvia was a child. She felt piqued, and Madame Wolsky stared at him
     rather haughtily. Still, she was grateful for his intervention.
"We thank you, Monsieur," she said stiffly. "But I think we have been here quite long
     enough."
He bowed, and again sat down.
"I will now take you a drive, Sylvia. We have had sufficient of this!"
Anna walked towards the door, and many were the curious glances now turned after the two
     friends.
"It will amuse you to see something of Lacville. As that gentleman said, I do not suppose you
     will ever come here again. And, as I shall spend most of my time in the Casino, I can very well
     afford to spare a little while out of it to-day!"
They made their way out of the great white building, Sylvia feeling oppressed, almost
     bewildered, by her first taste of gambling.
It was three o'clock, and very hot. They hailed one of the little open carriages which are
     among the innocent charms of Lacville.
"First you will go round the lake," said Madame Wolsky to the driver, "and then you will take
     us to the Pension Malfait, in l'Avenue des Acacias."
Under shady trees, bowling along sanded roads lined with pretty villas and châlets, they
     drove all round the lake, and more and more the place impressed Sylvia as might have done a
     charming piece of scene-painting.
All the people they passed on the road, in carriages, in motor-cars, and on foot, looked
     happy, prosperous, gay, and without a care in the world; and where in the morning there had
     been one boat, there were now five sailing on the blue, gleaming waters fringed with trees and
     flowering shrubs.
At last they once more found themselves close to the Casino. A steady stream of people was
     now pouring in through the great glass doors.
"This sort of thing will go on up till about nine this evening!" said Anna, smiling grimly.
     "Think, my dear—a hundred and twenty trains daily! That room in the Casino where I first saw
     you will be crammed to suffocation within an hour, and even the Club will be well filled,
     though I fancy the regular habitués of the club are rather apt to avoid Saturday and Sunday at
     Lacville. I myself, when living here, shall try to do something else on those two days. By the
     way—how dreadful that I should forget!—have you had a proper déjeuner?" she looked
     anxiously at Sylvia.
Sylvia laughed, and told something of her adventures at the Villa du Lac.
"The Villa du Lac? I have heard of it, but surely it's an extremely expensive hotel? The
     place I've chosen for myself is farther away from the Casino; but the distance will force me to
     take a walk every day, and that will be a very good thing. Last time I was at Monte Carlo I had
     a lodging right up in Monaco, and I found that a very much healthier plan than to live close to
     the Casino," Anna spoke quite seriously. "The Pension Malfait is really extraordinarily cheap
     for a place near Paris. I am only going to pay fifty-five francs a week, tout
     compris!"
They had now turned from the road encircling the lake, and were driving through leafy avenues
     which reminded Sylvia of a London suburb where she had once stayed.
The châlets and villas by which they passed were not so large nor so prosperous-looking as
     those that bordered the lake, but still many of them were pretty and fantastic-looking little
     houses, and the gardens were gay with flowers.
"I suppose no one lives here in the winter!" said Sylvia suddenly.
She had noticed, for in some ways she was very observant though in other ways strangely
     unseeing, that all the flowers were of the bedding-out varieties; there were luxuriant
     creepers, but not a single garden that she passed had that indefinable look of being an old or
     a well-tended garden.
"In the winter? Why, in the winter Lacville is an absolute desert," said Anna laughing. "You
     see, the Casino only has a summer Concession; it cannot open till April 15. Of course there are
     people who will tell you that Lacville is the plague-pit of Paris, but that's all nonsense!
     Lacville is neither better nor worse than other towns near the capital!"
The carriage had now drawn up before a large, plain, white house, across which was painted in
     huge, black letters, "Hôtel-Pension Malfait."
"This is the place I have found!" exclaimed Anna. "Would you care to come in and see the room
     I've engaged from next Monday week?"
Sylvia followed her into the house with curiosity and interest. Somehow she did not like the
     Pension Malfait, though it was clear that it had once been a handsome private mansion standing
     in large grounds of its own. The garden, however, had now been cut down to a small strip, and
     the whole place formed a great contrast to the gay and charming Villa du Lac.
What garden there was seemed uncared for, though an attempt had been made to make it look
     pretty with the aid of a few geraniums and marguerites.
M. Malfait, the proprietor of the Pension, whom Sylvia had already seen with Anna at the
     Casino, now came forward in the hall, and Sylvia compared him greatly to his disadvantage, to
     the merry M. Polperro.
"Madame has brought her friend?" he said eagerly, and staring at Sylvia as he spoke. "I hope
     that Madame's friend will come and stay with us too? I have a charming room which I could give
     this lady; but later on we shall be very full—full all the summer! The hot weather is a godsend
     for Lacville; for it drives the Parisians out from their unhealthy city."
He beckoned to his wife, a disagreeable-looking woman who was sitting in a little glass cage
     made in an angle of the square hall.
"Madame Wolsky has brought this good lady to see our Pension!" he exclaimed, "and perhaps she
     is also coming to stay with us—"
In vain Sylvia smilingly shook her head. She was made to go all over the large, rather gloomy
     house, and to peep into each of the bare, ugly bed-rooms.
That which Anna had engaged had a window looking over the back of the house; Sylvia thought
     it singularly cheerless. There was, however, a good arm-chair and a writing-table on which lay
     a new-looking blotter. It was the only bed-room containing such a luxury.
"An English lady was staying here not very long ago," observed M. Malfait, "and she bought
     that table and left it to me as a little gift when she went away. That was very gracious on her
     part!"
They glanced into the rather mournful-looking salon, of which the windows opened out
     on the tiny garden. And then M. Malfait led them proudly into the dining-room, with its one
     long table, running down the middle, on which at intervals were set dessert dishes filled with
     the nuts, grapes, and oranges of which Sylvia had already become so weary at the Hôtel de
     l'Horloge.
"My clientèle," said M. Malfait gravely, "is very select and chic. Those of my
     guests who frequent the Casino all belong to the Club!"
He stated the fact proudly, and Sylvia was amused to notice that in this matter he and mine
     host at the Villa du Lac apparently saw eye to eye. Both were eager to dissociate themselves
     from the ordinary gambler who lost or won a few francs in those of the gambling rooms open to
     the general public.
"Well," said Anna at last, "I suppose we had better leave now, but we might as well go on
     driving for about an hour, and then, when it is a little cooler, we will go back to Paris and
     be there in time for tea."
The driver was as good-natured as everyone else at Lacville seemed to be. He drove his fares
     away from the town, and so to the very outskirts of Lacville, where there were many charming
     bits of wild woodland and gardens up for sale.
"Even five years ago," he said, "much of this was forest, Mesdames; but now—well, Dame!—you
     can understand people are eager to sell. There are rumours that the Concession may be withdrawn
     from the Casino—that would be terrible, some say it would kill Lacville! It would be all the
     same to me, I should always find work elsewhere. But it makes everyone eager to sell—those, I
     mean, who have land at Lacville. There are others," continued the man—he had turned round on
     his seat, and the horse was going at a foot's pace—"who declare that it would be far better for
     the town—that there would be a more solid population established here—you understand, Mesdames,
     what I mean? The Lacville tradesmen would be as pleased, quite as pleased, or so some of them
     say; but, all the same, they are selling their land!"
When the two friends finally got back to the Hôtel de l'Horloge, Sylvia Bailey found that a
     letter, which had not been given to her that morning, contained the news that the English
     friends whom she had been expecting to join in Switzerland the following week had altered their
     plans, and were no longer going abroad.
Sylvia could hardly have said how it came about that she found herself established in the
     Villa du Lac only a week after her first visit to Lacville! But so it was, and she found the
     change a delightful one from every point of view.
Paris had suddenly become intolerably hot. As is the way with the Siren city when June is
     half-way through, the asphalt pavements radiated heat; the air was heavy, laden with strange,
     unpleasing odours; and even the trees, which form such delicious oases of greenery in the older
     quarters of the town were powdered with grey dust.
Also Anna Wolsky had become restless—quite unlike what she had been before that hour spent by
     her and by Sylvia Bailey in the Club at Lacville; she had gone back there three times,
     refusing, almost angrily, the company of her English friend. For a day or two Sylvia had
     thought seriously of returning to England, but she had let her pretty house at Market Dalling
     till the end of August; and, in spite of the heat, she did not wish to leave France.
Towards the end of the week Anna suddenly exclaimed:
"After all, why shouldn't you come out to Lacville, Sylvia? You can't go to Switzerland
     alone, and you certainly don't want to go on staying in Paris as Paris is now! I do not ask you
     to go to the Pension Malfait, but come to the Villa du Lac. You will soon make acquaintances in
     that sort of place—I mean," she added, "in your hotel, not in the town. We could always spend
     the mornings together—"
"—And I, too, could join the Club at the Casino," interjected Sylvia, smiling.
"No, no, I don't want you to do that!" exclaimed Anna hastily.
And then Sylvia, for some unaccountable reason, felt rather irritated. It was absurd of Anna
     to speak to her like that! Bill Chester, her trustee, and sometime lover, always treated her as
     if she was a child, and a rather naughty child, too; she would not allow Anna Wolsky to do
     so.
"I don't see why not!" she cried. "You yourself say that there is no harm in gambling if one
     can afford it."
This was how Sylvia Bailey came to find herself an inmate of the Villa du Lac at Lacville;
     and when once the owner of the Hôtel de l'Horloge had understood that in any case she meant to
     leave Paris, he had done all in his power to make her going to his relation, mine host of the
     Villa du Lac, easy and agreeable.
Sylvia learnt with surprise that she would have to pay very little more at the Villa du Lac
     than she had done at the Hôtel de l'Horloge; on the other hand, she could not there have the
     use of a sitting-room, for the good reason that there were no private sitting-rooms in the
     villa. But that, so she told herself, would be no hardship, and she could spend almost the
     whole of the day in the charming garden.
The two friends arrived at Lacville late in the afternoon, and on a Monday, that is on the
     quietest day of the week. And when Anna had left Sylvia at the Villa du Lac, driving off alone
     to her own humbler pension, the young Englishwoman, while feeling rather lonely,
     realised that M. Polperro had not exaggerated the charm of his hostelry.
Proudly mine host led Mrs. Bailey up the wide staircase into the spacious, airy room which
     had been prepared for her. "This was the bed-chamber of Madame la Comtesse de Para, the friend
     of the Empress Eugénie" he said.
The windows of the large, circular room, mirror-lined, and still containing the fantastic,
     rather showy decorations which dated from the Second Empire, overlooked the broad waters of the
     lake. Even now, though it was still daylight, certain romantic-natured couples had lit paper
     lanterns and hung them at the prows of their little sailing-boats.
The scene had a certain fairy-like beauty and stillness.
"Madame will find the Villa du Lac far more lively now" exclaimed M. Polperro cheerfully.
     "Last week I had only M. le Comte Paul de Virieu—no doubt Madame has heard of his
     brother-in-law, the Duc d'Eglemont?"
Sylvia smiled. "Yes, he won the Derby, a famous English race," she said; and then, simply
     because the landlord's love of talking was infectious, "And does the Count own horses, too?"
     she asked.
"Oh, no, Madame. He loves them, yes, and he is a fine horseman, but Count Paul, alas! has
     other things that interest and occupy him more than horses!"
After M. Polperro had bowed himself out, Sylvia sat down close to one of the open windows and
     looked out over the enchanting, and to her English eyes, unusual panorama spread out before
     her.
Yes, she had done well to come here, to a place of which, no doubt, many of her English
     friends would have thoroughly disapproved! But, after all, what was wrong about Lacville?
     Where, for the matter of that, was the harm of playing for money if one could afford to lose
     it?
Sylvia had hardly ever met so kind or so intelligent a woman as was her new friend, Anna
     Wolsky: and Anna—she made no secret of it at all—allowed playing for money to be her one
     absorbing interest in life.
As she thought of the Polish woman Sylvia felt sorry that she and her friend were in
     different pensions. It would have been so nice to have had her here, in the Villa du
     Lac. She felt rather lost without Anna, for she had become accustomed to the other's pleasant,
     stimulating companionship.
M. Polperro had said that dinner was at half-past seven. Sylvia got up from her chair by the
     window. She moved back into the room and put on a pretty white lace evening dress which she had
     not worn since she had been in France.
It would have been absurd to have appeared in such a gown in the little dining-room of the
     Hôtel de l'Horloge, which opened into the street; but the Villa du Lac was quite different.
As she saw herself reflected in one of the long mirrors let into the wall, Sylvia blushed and
     half-smiled. She had suddenly remembered the young man who had behaved, on that first visit of
     hers to the Villa du Lac, so much more discreetly than had all the other Frenchmen with whom
     she had been brought in temporary contact. She was familiar, through newspaper paragraphs, with
     the name of his brother-in-law, the French duke who had won the Derby. The Duc d'Eglemont, that
     was the racing French duke who had carried off the blue riband of the British Turf—the other
     name was harder to remember—then it came to her. Count Paul de Virieu. How kind and courteous
     he had been to her and her friend in the Club. She remembered him very vividly. Yes, though not
     exactly good-looking, he had fine eyes, and a clever, if not a very happy, face.
And then, on going down the broad, shallow staircase, and so through the large, oval hall
     into the dining-room, Sylvia Bailey saw that the man of whom she had been thinking was there,
     sitting very near to where she herself was now told that she was to sit. In the week that had
     gone by since Sylvia had paid her first visit to Lacville, the Villa had gradually filled up
     with people eager, like herself, to escape from the heat and dust of Paris, and the pleasant
     little table by the window had been appropriated by someone else.
When the young Englishwoman came into the dining-room, the Comte de Virieu got up from his
     chair, and clicking his heels together, bowed low and gravely.
She had never seen a man do that before. And it looked so funny! Sylvia felt inclined to
     burst out laughing. But all she did was to nod gravely, and the Count, sitting down, took no
     further apparent notice of her.
There were a good many people in the large room; parties of two, three, and four, talking
     merrily together, as is the way with French people at their meals. No one was alone save the
     Comte de Virieu and herself. Sylvia wondered if he felt as lonely as she did.
Towards the end of dinner the host came in and beamed on his guests; then he walked across to
     where Mrs. Bailey sat by herself. "I hope Madame is satisfied with her dinner," he said
     pleasantly. "Madame must always tell me if there is anything she does not like."
He called the youngest of the three waitresses. "Félicie! You must look very well after
     Madame," he said solemnly. "Make her comfortable, attend to her slightest wish"—and then he
     chuckled—"This is my niece," he said, "a very good girl! She is our adopted daughter. Madame
     will only have to ask her for anything she wants."
Sylvia felt much happier, and no longer lonely. It was all rather absurd—but it was all very
     pleasant! She had never met an hotel keeper like little Polperro, one at once so familiar and
     so inoffensive in manner.
"Thank you so much," she said, "but I am more than comfortable! And after dinner I shall go
     to the Casino to meet my friend, Madame Wolsky."
After they had finished dinner most of M. Polperro's guests streamed out into the garden; and
     there coffee was served to them on little round iron tables dotted about on the broad green
     lawn and sanded paths.
One or two of the ladies spoke a kindly word to Sylvia as they passed by her, but each had a
     friend or friends, and she was once more feeling lonely and deserted when suddenly Count Paul
     de Virieu walked across to where she was sitting by herself.
Again he clicked his heels together, and again he bowed low. But already Sylvia was getting
     used to these strange foreign ways, and she no longer felt inclined to laugh; in fact, she
     rather liked the young Frenchman's grave, respectful manner.
"If, as I suppose, Madame, seeing that you have come back to Lacville—"
Sylvia looked up with surprise painted on her fair face, for the Count was speaking in
     English, and it was extremely good, almost perfect English.
"—and you wish to join the Club at the Casino, I hope, Madame, that you will allow me to have
     the honour of proposing you as a member."
He waited a moment, and then went on: "It is far better for a lady to be introduced by
     someone who is already a member, than for the affair to be managed"—he slightly lowered his
     voice—"by an hotel keeper. I am well known to the Casino authorities. I have been a member of
     the Club for some time—"
He stood still gazing thoughtfully down into her face.
"But I am not yet sure that I shall join the Club," said Sylvia, hesitatingly.
He looked—was it relieved or sorry?
"I beg your pardon, Madame! I misunderstood. I thought you told M. Polperro just now in the
     dining-room that you were going to the Casino this evening."
Sylvia felt somewhat surprised. It was odd that he should have overheard her words to M.
     Polperro, amid all the chatter of their fellow-guests.
"Yes, I am going to the Casino," she said frankly, "but only to meet a friend of mine there,
     the lady with whom I was the other day when you so kindly interfered to save us, or rather to
     save me, from being ignominiously turned out of the Club." And then she added, a
     little shyly, "Won't you sit down?"
Again the Comte de Virieu bowed low before her, and then he sat down.
"I fear you will not be allowed to go into the Club this time unless you become a member.
     They have to be very strict in these matters; to allow a stranger in the Club at all is a legal
     infraction. The Casino authorities might be fined for doing so."
"How well you speak English!" exclaimed Sylvia, abruptly and irrelevantly.
"I was at school in England," he said, simply, "at a Catholic College called Beaumont, near
     Windsor; but now I do not go there as often as I should like to do."
And then, scarcely knowing how it came about, Sylvia fell into easy, desultory, almost
     intimate talk with this entire stranger. But there was something very agreeable in his simple
     serious manners.
After a while Sylvia suddenly remembered that the Count had thrown his cigarette away before
     speaking to her.
"Won't you smoke?" she said.
"Are you sure you don't mind, Madame?"
"No, of course I don't mind!" and she was just going to add that her husband had been a great
     smoker, when some feeling she could not have analysed to herself made her alter her words to
     "My father smoked all day long—"
The Count got up and went off towards the house. Sylvia supposed he had gone to get his
     cigarette-case; but a moment later he came back and sat down by her again. And then very soon
     out came the host's pretty little niece with a shawl over her arm. "I have brought Madame a
     shawl," said the girl, smiling, "for it's getting a little cold," and Sylvia felt touched. How
     very kind French people were—how kind and how thoughtful!
It struck half-past eight. Mrs. Bailey and the Comte de Virieu had been talking for quite a
     long time.
Sylvia jumped up. "I must go now," she cried, a little regretfully. "I promised to meet my
     friend in the hall of the Casino at half-past eight. She must be there waiting for me,
     now."
"If you will allow me to do so, I will escort you to the Casino," said the Count.
Sylvia ran upstairs to put on her hat and gloves. On the table which did duty for a
     dressing-table there was a small nosegay of flowers in a glass of water. It had not been there
     before she had come down to dinner.
As she put on a large black tulle hat she told herself with a happy smile that Lacville was
     an enchanting, a delightful place, and that she already felt quite at home here!
The Comte de Virieu was waiting for her in the hall.
"I think I ought to introduce myself to you, Madame," he said solemnly. "My name is Paul de
     Virieu."
"And mine is Sylvia Bailey," she said, a little breathlessly.
As they were hurrying along the short piece of road which led to the lane in which the Casino
     of Lacville is situated, the Count said suddenly, "Will you pardon me, Madame, if I take the
     liberty of saying that you should arrange for your friend to call for you on those evenings
     that you intend to spend at the Casino? It is not what English people call 'proper' for you to
     go to the Casino alone, or only accompanied by a stranger—for I, alas! am still a stranger to
     you."
There was no touch of coquetry or flirtation in the voice in which he said those words.
     Sylvia blushed violently, but she did not feel annoyed, only queerly touched by his solicitude
     for—well, she supposed it was for her reputation.
"You see, Madame," he went on soberly, "you look very young—I mean, pardon me, you
      are very young, and I will confess to you that the first time I saw you I thought you
     were a 'Miss.' Of course, I saw at once that you were English."
"An English girl would hardly have come all by herself to Lacville!" said Sylvia a little
     flippantly.
"Oh, Madame, English young ladies do such strange things!"
Sylvia wondered if the Count were not over-particular. Was Lacville the sort of place in
     which a woman could not walk a few yards by herself? It looked such a happy, innocent sort of
     spot.
"Perhaps I do not make myself clear," went on Count Paul.
He spoke very quickly, and in a low voice, for they were now approaching the door of the
     Casino. "Not very long ago a lady had her hand-bag snatched from her within a few yards of the
     police-station, in the centre of the town. Everyone comes here to make or to lose money—"
"But most of the people look so quiet and respectable," she said smiling.
"That is true, but there are the exceptions. Lacville contains more exceptions than do most
     places, Madame."
They were now in the hall of the Casino. Yes, there was Anna Wolsky looking eagerly at the
     great glass doors.
"Anna? Anna? Here I am! I'm so sorry I'm late!"
Sylvia turned to introduce the Comte de Virieu to Madame Wolsky, but he was already bowing
     stiffly, and before she could speak he walked on, leaving Mrs. Bailey with her friend.
"I see you've already made one acquaintance, Sylvia," said the Polish lady dryly.
"That's the man who was so kind the last time we were here together. He is staying at the
     Villa du Lac," Sylvia answered, a little guiltily. "His name is Count Paul de Virieu."
"Yes, I am aware of that; I know him by sight quite well," Anna said quickly.
"And he has offered to propose me as a member of the Club if I wish to join," added
     Sylvia.
"I shall propose you—of course!" exclaimed Anna Wolsky. "But I do not think it is
     worth worrying about your membership to-night. We can spend the evening downstairs, in the
     public Salle des Jeux. I should not care to leave you alone there, even on a Monday
     evening."
"You talk as if I were sugar or salt that would melt!" said Sylvia, a little vexed.
"One has to be very careful in a place like Lacville," said Anna shortly. "There are all
     sorts of queer people gathered together here on the look-out for an easy way of making money."
     She turned an affectionate look on her friend. "You are not only very pretty, my dear Sylvia,
     but you look what the people here probably regard as being of far more consequence, that is,
     opulent."
"So I am," said Sylvia gaily, "opulent and very, very happy, dear Anna! I am so glad that you
     brought me here, and first made me acquainted with this delightful place! I am sure Switzerland
     would not have been half as amusing as Lacville—"
The public gambling room was much quieter and emptier than it had been on the Saturday when
     Sylvia had first seen it. But all the people playing there, both those sitting at the table and
     those who stood in serried ranks behind them, looked as if they were engaged on some serious
     undertaking.
They did not appear, as the casual holiday crowd had done, free from care. There was
     comparatively little talking among them, and each round of the monotonous game was got through
     far quicker than had been the case the week before. Money was risked, lost, or gained, with
     extraordinary swiftness and precision.
A good many of the people there, women as well as men, glanced idly for a moment at the two
     newcomers, but they soon looked away again, intent on their play.
Sylvia felt keenly interested. She could have stopped and watched the scene for hours without
     wanting to play herself; but Anna Wolsky soon grew restless, and started playing. Even risking
     a few francs was better to her than not gambling at all!
"It's an odd thing," she said in a low voice, "but I don't see here any of the people I'm
     accustomed to see at Monte Carlo. As a rule, whenever one goes to this kind of place one meets
     people one has seen before. We gamblers are a caste—a sect part!"
"I can't bear to hear you call yourself a gambler," said Sylvia in a low voice.
Anna laughed good-humouredly.
"Believe me, my dear, there is not the difference you apparently think there is between a
     gambler and the man who has never touched a card."
Anna Wolsky looked round her as she spoke with a searching glance, and then she suddenly
     exclaimed,
"Yes, I do know someone here after all! That funny-looking couple over there were at
     Aix-les-Bains all last summer."
"Which people do you mean?" asked Sylvia eagerly.
"Don't you see that long, thin man who is so queerly dressed—and his short, fat wife? A
     dreadful thing happened to them—a great friend of theirs, a Russian, was drowned in Lac
     Bourget. It made a great deal of talk in Aix at the time it happened."
Sylvia Bailey looked across the room. She was able to pick out in a moment the people Anna
     meant, and perhaps because she was in good spirits to-night, she smiled involuntarily at their
     rather odd appearance.
Standing just behind the croupier—whose task it is to rake in and to deal out the
     money—was a short, stout, dark woman, dressed in a bright purple gown, and wearing a pale blue
     bonnet particularly unbecoming to her red, massive face. She was not paying much attention to
     the play, though now and again she put a five-franc piece onto the green baize. Instead, her
     eyes were glancing round restlessly this way and that, almost as if she were seeking for
     someone.
Behind her, in strong contrast to herself, was a tall, thin, lanky man, to Sylvia's English
     eyes absurdly as well as unsuitably dressed in a grey alpaca suit and a shabby Panama hat. In
     his hand he held open a small book, in which he noted down all the turns of the game. Unlike
     his short, stout wife, this tall, thin man seemed quite uninterested in the people about him,
     and Sylvia could see his lips moving, his brows frowning, as if he were absorbed in some
     intricate and difficult calculation.
The couple looked different from the people about them; in a word, they did not look
     French.
"The man—their name is Wachner—only plays on a system," whispered Anna. "He is in fact what I
     call a System Maniac. That is why he keeps noting down the turns in his little book. That sort
     of gambler ought never to leave Monte Carlo. It is only at Monte Carlo—that is to say, at
     Roulette—that such a man ever gets a real chance of winning anything. I should have expected
     them to belong to the Club, and not to trouble over this kind of play!"
Even as she spoke, Anna slightly inclined her head, and the woman at whom they were both
     looking smiled broadly, showing her strong white teeth as she did so; and then, as her eyes
     travelled from Anna Wolsky to Anna's companion, they became intent and questioning.
Madame Wachner, in spite of her unwieldy form, and common, showy clothes, was fond of
     beautiful things, and especially fond of jewels. She was wondering whether the pearls worn by
     the lovely young Englishwoman standing opposite were real or sham.
The two friends did not stay very long in the Casino on that first evening. Sylvia drove Anna
     to the Pension Malfait, and then she came back alone to the Villa du Lac.
Before drawing together the curtains of her bed-room windows, Sylvia Bailey stood for some
     minutes looking out into the warm moonlit night.
On the dark waters of the lake floated miniature argosies, laden with lovers seeking
     happiness—ay, and perhaps finding it, too.
The Casino was outlined with fairy lamps; the scene was full of glamour, and of mysterious
     beauty. More than ever Sylvia was reminded of an exquisite piece of scene painting, and it
     seemed to her as if she were the heroine of a romantic opera—and the hero, with his ardent eyes
     and melancholy, intelligent face, was Count Paul de Virieu.
She wondered uneasily why Anna Wolsky had spoken of the Count as she had done—was it with
     dislike or only contempt?
Long after Sylvia was in bed she could hear the tramping made by the feet of those who were
     leaving the Casino and hurrying towards the station; but she did not mind the sound. All was so
     strange, new, and delightful, and she fell asleep and dreamt pleasant dreams.
On waking the next morning, Sylvia Bailey forgot completely for a moment where she was.
She looked round the large, airy room, which was so absolutely unlike the small bed-room she
     had occupied in the Hôtel de l'Horloge, with a sense of bewilderment and surprise.
And then suddenly she remembered! Why of course she was at Lacville; and this delightful,
     luxurious room had been furnished and arranged for the lady-in-waiting and friend of the
     Empress Eugénie. The fact gave an added touch of romance to the Hôtel du Lac.
A ray of bright sunlight streamed in through the curtains she had pinned together the night
     before. And her travelling clock told her that it was not yet six. But Sylvia jumped out of
     bed, and, drawing back the curtains, she looked out, and across the lake.
The now solitary expanse of water seemed to possess a new beauty in the early morning
     sunlight, and the white Casino, of which the minarets were reflected in its blue depths, might
     have been a dream palace. Nothing broke the intense stillness but the loud, sweet twittering of
     the birds in the trees which surrounded the lake.
But soon the spell was broken. When the six strokes of the hour chimed out from the old
     parish church which forms the centre of the town of Lacville, as if by enchantment there rose
     sounds of stir both indoors and out.
A woman came out of the lodge of the Villa du Lac, and slowly opened the great steel and gilt
     gates.
Sylvia heard the rush of bath water, even the queer click-click of a shower bath. M. Polperro
     evidently insisted on an exceptional standard of cleanliness for his household.
Sylvia felt fresh and well. The languor induced by the heat of Paris had left her. There
     seemed no reason why she should not get up too, and even go out of doors if so the fancy
     pleased her.
She had just finished dressing when there came curious sounds from the front of the Villa,
     and again she went over to her window.
A horse was being walked up and down on the stones of the courtyard in front of the horseshoe
     stairway which led up to the hall door. It was not yet half-past six. Who could be going to
     ride at this early hour of the morning?
Soon her unspoken question was answered; for the Comte de Virieu, clad in riding breeches and
     a black jersey, came out of the house, and close on his heels trotted M. Polperro, already
     wearing his white chef's cap and apron.
Sylvia could hear his "M'sieur le Comte" this, and "M'sieur le Comte" that, and she smiled a
     little to herself. The owner of the Hôtel du Lac was very proud of his noble guest.
The Comte de Virieu was also laughing and talking; he was more animated than she had yet seen
     him. Sylvia told herself that he looked very well in his rather odd riding dress.
Waving a gay adieu to mine host, he vaulted into the saddle, and then rode out of the gates,
     and so sharply to the left.
Sylvia wondered if he were going for a ride in the Forest of Montmorency, which, in her lying
     guide-book, was mentioned as the principal attraction of Lacville.
There came a knock at the door, and Sylvia, calling out "Come in!" was surprised, and rather
     amused, to see that it was M. Polperro himself who opened it.
"I have come to ask if Madame has slept well," he observed, "and also to know if she would
     like an English breakfast? If yes, it shall be laid in the dining-room, unless Madame would
     rather have it up here."
"I would much rather come downstairs to breakfast," said Sylvia; "but I do not want anything
     yet, M. Polperro. It will do quite well if I have breakfast at half-past eight or nine."
She unpacked her trunks, and as she put her things away it suddenly struck her that she meant
     to stay at Lacville for some time. It was an interesting, a new, even a striking experience,
     this of hers; and though she felt rather lost without Anna Wolsky's constant presence and
     companionship, she was beginning to find it pleasant to be once more her own mistress.
She sat down and wrote some letters—the sort of letters that can be written or not as the
     writer feels inclined. Among them was a duty letter to her trustee, Bill Chester, telling him
     of her change of address, and of her change of plan.
The people with whom she had been going to Switzerland were friends of Bill Chester too, and
     so it was doubtful now whether he would go abroad at all.
And all the time Sylvia was writing there was at the back of her mind a curious,
     unacknowledged feeling that she was waiting for something to happen, that there was something
     pleasant for her to look forward to....
And when at last she went down into the dining-room, and Paul de Virieu came in, Sylvia
     suddenly realised, with a sense of curious embarrassment, what it was she had been waiting for
     and looking forward to. It was her meeting with the Comte de Virieu.
"I hope my going out so early did not disturb you," he said, in his excellent English. "I saw
     you at your window."
Sylvia shook her head, smiling.
"I had already been awake for at least half an hour," she answered.
"I suppose you ride? Most of the Englishwomen I knew as a boy rode, and rode well."
"My father was very anxious I should ride, and as a child I was well taught, but I have not
     had much opportunity of riding since I grew up."
Sylvia reddened faintly, for she fully expected the Count to ask her if she would ride with
     him, and she had already made up her mind to say "No," though to say "Yes" would be very
     pleasant!
But he did nothing of the sort. Even at this early hour of their acquaintance it struck
     Sylvia how unlike the Comte de Virieu's manner to her was to that of the other young men she
     knew. While his manner was deferential, even eager, yet there was not a trace of flirtation in
     it. Also the Count had already altered all Sylvia Bailey's preconceived notions of
     Frenchmen.
Sylvia had supposed a Frenchman's manner to a woman to be almost invariably familiar, in
     fact, offensively familiar. She had had the notion that a pretty young woman—it would, of
     course, have been absurd for her to have denied, even to herself, that she was very pretty—must
     be careful in her dealing with foreigners, and she believed it to be a fact that a Frenchman
     always makes love to an attractive stranger, even on the shortest acquaintance!
This morning, and she was a little piqued that it was so, Sylvia had to admit to herself that
     the Comte de Virieu treated her much as he might have done some old lady in whom he took a
     respectful interest....
And yet twice during the half-hour her breakfast lasted she looked up to see his blue eyes
     fixed full on her with an earnest, inquiring gaze, and she realised that it was not at all the
     kind of gaze Paul de Virieu would have turned on an old lady.
They got up from their respective tables at the same moment. He opened the door for her, and
     then, after a few minutes, followed her out into the garden.
"Have you yet visited the potager?" he asked, deferentially.
Sylvia looked at him, puzzled. "Potager" was quite a new French word to her.
"I think you call it the kitchen-garden." A smile lit up his face. "The people who built the
     Villa du Lac a matter of fifty years ago were very fond of gardening. I think it might amuse
     you to see the potager. Allow me to show it you."
They were now walking side by side. It was a delicious day, and the dew still glistened on
     the grass and leaves. Sylvia thought it would be very pleasant, and also instructive, to see a
     French kitchen-garden.
"Strange to say when I was a child I was often at the Villa du Lac, for the then owner was a
     distant cousin of my mother. He and his kind wife allowed me to come here for my convalescence
     after a rather serious illness when I was ten years old. My dear mother did not like me to be
     far from Paris, so I was sent to Lacville."
"What a curious place to send a child to!" exclaimed Sylvia.
"Ah, but Lacville was extremely different from what it is now, Madame. True, there was the
     lake, where Parisians used to come out each Sunday afternoon to fish and boat in a humble way,
     and there were a few villas built round the lake. But you must remember that in those
     prehistoric days there was no Casino! It is the Casino which has transformed Lacville into what
     we now see."
"Then we have reason to bless the Casino!" cried Sylvia, gaily.
They had now left behind them the wide lawn immediately behind the Villa du Lac, and were
     walking by a long, high wall. The Count pushed open a narrow door set in an arch in the wall,
     and Sylvia walked through into one of the largest and most delightful kitchen-gardens she had
     ever seen.
It was brilliant with colour and scent; the more homely summer flowers filled the borders,
     while, at each place where four paths met, a round, stone-rimmed basin, filled with water to
     the brim, gave a sense of pleasant coolness.
The farther end of the walled garden was bounded by a stone orangery, a building dating from
     the eighteenth century, and full of the stately grace of a vanished epoch.
"What a delightful place!" Sylvia exclaimed. "But this garden must cost M. Polperro a great
     deal of money to keep up—"
The Comte de Virieu laughed.
"Far from it! Our clever host hires out his potager to a firm of market gardeners,
     part of the bargain being that they allow him to have as much fruit and vegetables as he
     requires throughout the year. Why, the potager of the Villa du Lac supplies the whole
     of Lacville with fruit and flowers! When I was a child I thought this part of the garden
     paradise, and I spent here my happiest hours."
"It must be very odd for you to come back and stay in the Villa now that it is an hotel."
"At first it seemed very strange," he answered gravely. "But now I have become quite used to
     the feeling."
They walked on for awhile along one of the narrow flower-bordered paths.
"Would you care to go into the orangery?" he said. "There is not much to see there now, for
     all the orange-trees are out of doors. Still, it is a quaint, pretty old building."
The orangery of the Villa du Lac was an example of that at once artificial and graceful
     eighteenth-century architecture which, perhaps because of its mingled formality and delicacy,
     made so distinguished and attractive a setting to feminine beauty. It remained, the only
     survival of the dependencies of a château sacked and burned in the Great Revolution, more than
     half a century before the Villa du Lac was built.
The high doors were wide open, and Sylvia walked in. Though all the pot-plants and half-hardy
     shrubs were sunning themselves in the open-air, the orangery did not look bare, for every inch
     of the inside walls had been utilised for growing grapes and peaches.
There was a fountain set in the centre of the stone floor, and near the fountain was a
     circular seat.
"Let us sit down," said Paul de Virieu suddenly. But when Sylvia Bailey sat down he did not
     come and sit by her, instead he so placed himself that he looked across at her slender, rounded
     figure, and happy smiling face.
"Are you thinking of staying long at Lacville, Madame?" he asked abruptly.
"I don't know," she answered hesitatingly. "It will depend on my friend Madame Wolsky's
     plans. If we both like it, I daresay we shall stay three or four weeks."
There fell what seemed to Sylvia a long silence between them. The Frenchman was gazing at her
     with a puzzled, thoughtful look.
Suddenly he got up, and after taking a turn up and down the orangery, he came and stood
     before her.
"Mrs. Bailey!" he exclaimed. "Will you permit me to be rather impertinent?"
Sylvia reddened violently. The question took her utterly by surprise. But the Comte de
     Virieu's next words at once relieved, and yes, it must be admitted, chagrined her.
"I ask you, Madame, to leave Lacville! I ask permission to tell you frankly and plainly that
     it is not a place to which you ought to have been brought."
He spoke with great emphasis.
Sylvia looked up at him. She was bewildered, and though not exactly offended, rather
     hurt.
"But why?" she asked plaintively. "Why should I not stay at Lacville?"
"Oh, well, there can be no harm in your staying on a few days if you are desirous of doing
     so. But Lacville is not a place where I should care for my own sister to come and stay." He
     went on, speaking much quicker—"Indeed, I will say more! I will tell you that Lacville may seem
     a paradise to you, but that it is a paradise full of snakes."
"Snakes?" repeated Sylvia slowly. "You mean, of course, human snakes?"
He bowed gravely.
"Every town where reigns the Goddess of play attracts reptiles, Madame, as the sun attracts
     lizards! It is not the game that does so, or even the love of play in the Goddess's victims;
     no, it is the love of gold!"
Sylvia noticed that he had grown curiously pale.
"Lacville as a gambling centre counts only next to Monte Carlo. But whereas many people go to
     Monte Carlo for health, and for various forms of amusement, people only come here in order to
     play, and to see others play. The Casino, which doubtless appears to you a bright, pretty
     place, has been the scene and the cause of many a tragedy. Do you know how Paris regards
     Lacville?" he asked searchingly.
"No—yes," Sylvia hesitated. "You see I never heard of Lacville till about a week ago." Innate
     honesty compelled her to add, "But I have heard that the Paris trades-people don't like
     Lacville."
"Let me tell you one thing," the Count spoke with extraordinary seriousness. "Every tradesman
     in Paris, without a single exception, has signed a petition imploring the Government to suspend
     the Gambling Concession!"
"What an extraordinary thing!" exclaimed Sylvia, and she was surprised indeed.
"Pardon me, it is not at all extraordinary. A great deal of the money which would otherwise
     go into the pockets of these tradesmen goes now to enrich the anonymous shareholders of the
     Casino of Lacville! Of course, Paris hotel-keepers are not in quite the same position as are
     the other Parisian trades-people. Lacville does not do them much harm, for the place is so near
     Paris that foreigners, if they go there at all, generally go out for the day. Only the most
     confirmed gambler cares actually to live at Lacville."
He looked significantly at Sylvia, and she felt a wave of hot colour break over her face.
"Yes, I know what you must be thinking, and it is, indeed, the shameful truth! I, Madame,
     have the misfortune to be that most miserable and most God-forsaken of living beings, a
     confirmed gambler."
The Count spoke in a tone of stifled pain, almost anger, and Sylvia gazed up at his stern,
     sad face with pity and concern filling her kind heart.
"I will tell you my story in a few words," he went on, and then he sat down by her, and began
     tracing with his stick imaginary patterns on the stone floor.
"I was destined for what I still regard as the most agreeable career in the world—that of
     diplomacy. You see how I speak English? Well, Madame, I speak German and Spanish equally well.
     And then, most unhappily for me, my beloved mother died, and I inherited from her a few
     thousand pounds. I felt very miserable, and I happened to be at the moment idle. A friend
     persuaded me to go to Monte Carlo. That fortnight, Madame, changed my life—made me what the
     English call 'an idle good-for-nothing.' Can you wonder that I warn you against staying at
     Lacville?"
Sylvia was touched, as well as surprised, by his confidences. His words breathed sincerity,
     and the look of humiliation and pain on his face had deepened. He looked white and drawn.
"It is very kind of you to tell me this, and I am very much obliged to you for your warning,"
     she said in a low tone.
But the Comte de Virieu went on as if he hardly heard her words.
"The lady with whom you first came to Lacville—I mean the Polish lady—is well known to me by
     sight. For the last three years I have seen her at Monte Carlo in the winter, and at Spa and
     Aix-les-Bains in the summer. Of course I was not at all surprised to see her turn up here, but
     I confess, Madame, that I was very much astonished to see with her a"—he hesitated a moment—"a
     young English lady. You would, perhaps, be offended if I were to tell you exactly what I felt
     when I saw you at the Casino!"
"I do not suppose I should be offended," said Sylvia softly.
"I felt, Madame, as if I saw a lily growing in a field of high, rank, evil-smelling—nay,
     perhaps I should say, poisonous—weeds."
"But I cannot go away now!" cried Sylvia. She was really impressed—very uncomfortably
     impressed—by his earnest words. "It would be most unkind to my friend, Madame Wolsky. Surely,
     it is possible to stay at Lacville, and even to play a little, without anything very terrible
     happening?" She looked at him coaxingly, anxiously, as a child might have done.
But Sylvia was not a child; she was a very lovely young woman. Comte Paul de Virieu's heart
     began to beat.
But, bah! This was absurd! His day of love and love-making lay far, far behind him. He rose
     and walked towards the door.
In speaking to her as he had forced himself to speak, the Frenchman had done an unselfish and
     kindly action. Sylvia's gentle and unsophisticated charm had touched him deeply, and so he had
     given her what he knew to be the best possible advice.
"I am not so foolish as to pretend that the people who come and play in the Casino of
     Lacville are all confirmed gamblers," he said, slowly. "We French take our pleasures lightly,
     Madame, and no doubt there is many an excellent Parisian bourgeois who comes here and makes or
     loses his few francs, and gets no harm from it. But, still, I swore to myself that I would warn
     you of the danger—"
They went out into the bright sunshine again, and Sylvia somehow felt as if she had made a
     friend—a real friend—in the Comte de Virieu. It was a curious sensation, and one that gave her
     more pleasure than she would have cared to own even to herself.
Most of the men she had met since she became a widow treated her as an irresponsible being.
     Many of them tried to flirt with her for the mere pleasure of flirting with so pretty a woman;
     others, so she was resentfully aware, had only become really interested in her when they became
     aware that she had been left by her husband with an income of two thousand pounds a year. She
     had had several offers of marriage since her widowhood, but not one of the men who had come and
     said he loved her had confessed as much about himself as this stranger had done.
She was the more touched and interested because the Frenchman's manner was extremely
     reserved. Even in the short time she had been at the Villa du Lac, Sylvia had realised that
     though the Count was on speaking terms with most of his fellow-guests, he seemed intimate with
     none of the people whose happy chatter had filled the dining-room the night before.
Just before going back into the Villa, Sylvia stopped short; she fixed her large ingenuous
     eyes on the Count's face.
"I want to thank you again," she said diffidently, "for your kindness in giving me this
     warning. You know we in England have a proverb, 'Forewarned is forearmed.' Well, believe me, I
     will not forget what you have said, and—and I am grateful for your confidence. Of course, I
     regard it as quite private."
The Count looked at her for a moment in silence, and then he said very deliberately,
"I am afraid the truth about me is known to all those good enough to concern themselves with
     my affairs. I am sure, for instance, that your Polish friend is well aware of it! You see
     before you a man who has lost every penny he owned in the world, who does not know how to work,
     and who is living on the charity of relations."
Sylvia had never heard such bitter accents issue from human lips before.
"The horse you saw me ride this morning," he went on in a low tone, "is not my horse; it
     belongs to my brother-in-law. It is sent for me every day because my sister loves me, and she
     thinks my health will suffer if I do not take exercise. My brother-in-law did not give me the
     horse, though he is the most generous of human beings, for he feared that if he did I should
     sell it in order that I might have more money for play."
There was a long, painful pause, then in a lighter tone the Count added, "And now, au revoir,
     Madame, and forgive me for having thrust my private affairs on your notice! It is not a thing I
     have been tempted ever to do before with one whom I have the honour of knowing as slightly as I
     know yourself."
Sylvia went upstairs to her room. She was touched, moved, excited. It was quite a new
     experience with her to come so really near to any man's heart and conscience.
Life is a secret and a tangled skein, full of loose, almost invisible threads. This curiously
     intimate, and yet impersonal conversation with one who was not only a stranger, but also a
     foreigner, made her realise how little we men and women really know of one another. How small
     was her knowledge, for instance, of Bill Chester—though, to be sure, of him there was perhaps
     nothing to know. How really little also she knew of Anna Wolsky! They had become friends, and
     yet Anna had never confided to her any intimate or secret thing about herself. Why, she did not
     even know Anna's home address!
Sylvia felt that there was now a link which hardly anything could break between herself and
     this Frenchman, whom she had never seen till a week ago. Even if they never met again after
     to-day, she would never forget that he had allowed her to see into the core of his sad,
     embittered heart. He had lifted a corner of the veil which covered his conscience, and he had
     done this in order that he might save her, a stranger, from what he knew by personal experience
     to be a terrible fate!
Two hours later Sylvia Bailey was having luncheon with Anna Wolsky in the Pension
     Malfait.
The two hostelries, hers and Anna's, were in almost absurd contrast the one to the other. At
     the Villa du Lac everything was spacious, luxurious, and quiet. M. Polperro's clients spent, or
     so Sylvia supposed, much of their time in their own rooms upstairs, or else in the Casino,
     while many of them had their own motors, and went out on long excursions. They were
     cosmopolitans, and among them were a number of Russians.
Here at the Pension Malfait, the clientèle was French. All was loud talking, bustle, and
     laughter. The large house contained several young men who had daily work in Paris. Others, like
     Madame Wolsky, were at Lacville in order to indulge their passion for play, and quite a number
     of people came in simply for meals.
Among these last, rather to Sylvia's surprise, were Monsieur and Madame Wachner, the
     middle-aged couple whom Anna Wolsky had pointed out as having been at Aix-les-Bains the year
     before, at the same time as she was herself.
The husband and wife were now sitting almost exactly opposite Anna and Sylvia at the narrow
     table d'hôte, and again a broad, sunny smile lit up the older woman's face when she looked
     across at the two friends.
"We meet again!" she exclaimed in a guttural voice, and then in French, addressing Madame
     Wolsky, "This is not very much like Aix-les-Bains, is it, Madame?"
Anna shook her head.
"Still it is a pretty place, Lacville, and cheaper than one would think." She leant across
     the table, and continued in a confidential undertone: "As for us—my husband and I—we have taken
     a small villa; he has grown so tired of hotels."
"But surely you had a villa at Aix?" said Anna, in a surprised tone.
"Yes, we had a villa there, certainly. But then a very sad affair happened to us—" she
     sighed. "You may have heard of it?" and she fixed her small, intensely bright eyes inquiringly
     on Anna.
Anna bent her head.
"Yes, I heard all about it" she said gravely. "You mean about your friend who was drowned in
     the lake? It must have been a very distressing thing for you and your husband."
"Yes, indeed! He never can bear to speak of it."
And Sylvia, looking over at the man sitting just opposite to herself, saw a look of unease
     come over his sallow face. He was eating his omelette steadily, looking neither to the right
     nor to the left.
"Ami Fritz!" cried his wife, turning suddenly to him, and this time she spoke English, "Say,
     'How d'you do,' to this lady! You will remember that we used to see 'er at Aix, in the Casino
     there?"
"Ami Fritz" bowed his head, but remained silent.
"Yes," his wife went on, volubly, "that sad affair made Aix very unpleasant to us! After that
     we spent the winter in various pensions, and then, instead of going back to Aix, we came 'ere.
     So far, I am quite satisfied with Lacville."
Though she spoke with a very bad accent and dropped her aitches, her English was quick and
     colloquial.
"Lacville is a cosy, 'appy place!" she cried, and this time she smiled full at Sylvia, and
     Sylvia told herself that the woman's face, if very plain, was like a sunflower,—so broad, so
     kindly, so good-humoured!
When déjeuner was over, the four had coffee together, and the melancholy Monsieur Wachner,
     who was so curiously unlike his bright, vivacious wife, at last broke into eager talk, for he
     and Anna Wolsky had begun to discuss different gambling systems. His face lighted up; it was
     easy to see what interested and stimulated this long, lanky man whose wife addressed him
     constantly as "Ami Fritz."
"Now 'e is what the English call 'obby-'orse riding," she exclaimed, with a loud laugh. "To
     see 'im in all 'is glory you should see my Fritz at Monte Carlo!" she was speaking to Sylvia.
     "There 'as never been a system invented in connection with that devil-game, Roulette, that
     L'Ami Fritz does not know, and that 'e 'as not—at some time or other—played more to 'is
     satisfaction than to mine!" But she spoke very good-humouredly. "'E cannot ring many changes on
     Baccarat, and I do not often allow 'im to play downstairs. No, no, that is too dangerous! That
     is for children and fools!"
Sylvia was still too ignorant of play to understand the full significance of Madame Wachner's
     words, but she was vaguely interested, though she could not understand one word of the eager
     talk between Anna and the man.
"Let us leave them at it!" exclaimed the older woman, suddenly. "It will be much nicer in the
     garden, Madame, for it is not yet too 'ot for out of doors. By the way, I forgot to tell you my
     name. That was very rude of me! My name is Wachner—Sophie Wachner, at your service."
"And my name is Bailey—Sylvia Bailey."
"Ah, I thought so—you are a Mees!"
"No," said Sylvia gravely, "I am a widow."
Madame Wachner's face became very serious.
"Ah," she said, sympathetically, "that is sad—very sad for one so young and so
     beautiful!"
Sylvia smiled. Madame Wachner was certainly a kindly, warm-hearted sort of woman.
They walked out together into the narrow garden, and soon Madame Wachner began to amuse her
     companion by lively, shrewd talk, and they spent a pleasant half hour pacing up and down.
The Wachners seemed to have travelled a great deal about the world and especially in several
     of the British Colonies.
It was in New Zealand that Madame Wachner had learnt to speak English: "My 'usband, 'e was in
     business there," she said vaguely.
"And you?" she asked at last, fixing her piercing eyes on the pretty Englishwoman, and
     allowing them to travel down till they rested on the milky row of perfectly-matched pearls.
"Oh, this is my first visit to France," answered Sylvia, "and I am enjoying it very much
     indeed."
"Then you 'ave not gambled for money yet?" observed Madame Wachner. "In England they are too
     good to gamble!" She spoke sarcastically, but Sylvia did not know that.
"I never in my life played for money till last week, and then I won thirty francs!"
"Ah! Then now surely you will join the Club?"
"Yes," said Sylvia a little awkwardly. "I suppose I shall join the Club. You see, my friend
     is so fond of play."
"I believe you there!" cried the other, familiarly. "We used to watch Madame Wolsky at Aix—my
     'usband and I. It seems so strange that there we never spoke to 'er, and that now we seem to
     know 'er already so much better than we did in all the weeks we were together at Aix! But
     there"—she sighed a loud, heaving sigh—"we 'ad a friend—a dear young friend—with us at
     Aix-les-Bains."
"Yes, I know," said Sylvia, sympathisingly.
"You know?" Madame Wachner looked at her quickly. "What is it that you know, Madame?"
"Madame Wolsky told me about it. Your friend was drowned, was he not? It must have been very
     sad and dreadful for you and your husband."
"It was terrible!" said Madame Wachner vehemently. "Terrible!"
The hour in the garden sped by very quickly, and Sylvia was rather sorry when it came to be
     time to start for the Casino.
"Look here!" cried Madame Wachner suddenly. "Why should not L'Ami Fritz escort Madame Wolsky
     to the Casino while you and I take a pretty drive? I am so tired of that old Casino—and you
     will be so tired of it soon, too!" she exclaimed in an aside to Sylvia.
Sylvia looked questioningly at Anna.
"Yes, do take a drive, dear. You have plenty of time, for I intend to spend all this
     afternoon and evening at the Casino," said Madame Wolsky, quickly, in answer to Sylvia's look.
     "It will do quite well if you come there after you have had your tea. My friend will never go
     without her afternoon tea;" she turned to Madame Wachner.
"I, too, love afternoon tea!" cried Madame Wachner, in a merry tone. "Then that is settled!
     You and I will take a drive, and then we will 'ave tea and then go to the Casino."
Mrs. Bailey accompanied her friend upstairs while Anna put on her things and got out her
     money.
"You will enjoy a drive on this hot day, even with that funny old woman," said Madame Wolsky,
     affectionately. "And meanwhile I will get your membership card made out for the Club. If you
     like to do so, you might have a little gamble this evening. But I do not want my sweet English
     friend to become as fond of play as I am myself"—there crept a sad note into her voice.
     "However, I do not think there is any fear of that!"
When the two friends came downstairs again, they found Monsieur and Madame Wachner standing
     close together and speaking in a low voice. As she came nearer to them Sylvia saw that they
     were so absorbed in each other that they did not see her, and she heard the man saying in a
     low, angry voice, in French: "There is nothing to be done here at all, Sophie! It is foolish of
     us to waste our time like this!" And then Madame Wachner answered quickly, "You are always so
     gloomy, so hopeless! I tell you there is something to be done. Leave it to me!"
Then, suddenly becoming aware that Sylvia was standing beside her, the old woman went on: "My
     'usband, Madame, always says there is nothing to be done! You see, 'e is tired of 'is last
     system, and 'e 'as not yet invented another. But, bah! I say to 'im that no doubt luck will
     come to-day. 'E may find Madame Wolsky a mascot." She was very red and looked disturbed.
"I 'ave asked them to telephone for an open carriage," Madame Wachner added, in a
     better-humoured tone. "It will be here in three or four minutes. Shall we drive you first to
     the Casino?" This question she asked of her husband.
"No," said Monsieur Wachner, harshly, "certainly not! I will walk in any case."
"And I will walk too," said Anna, who had just come up. "There is no need at all for us to
     take you out of your way. You had better drive at once into the open country, Sylvia."
And so they all started, Madame Wolsky and her tall, gaunt, morose companion, walking, while
     Sylvia and Madame Wachner drove off in the opposite direction.
The country immediately round Lacville is not pretty; the little open carriage was rather
     creaky, and the horse was old and tired, and yet Sylvia Bailey enjoyed her drive very much.
Madame Wachner, common-looking, plain, almost grotesque in appearance though she was,
     possessed that rare human attribute, vitality.
Sometimes she spoke in French, sometimes in English, changing from the one to the other with
     perfect ease; and honestly pleased at having escaped a long, dull, hot afternoon in the Casino,
     the older woman set herself to please and amuse Sylvia. She thoroughly succeeded. A clever
     gossip, she seemed to know a great deal about all sorts of interesting people, and she gave
     Sylvia an amusing account of Princess Mathilde Bonaparte, whose splendid château they saw from
     their little carriage.
Madame Wachner also showed the most sympathetic interest in Sylvia and Sylvia's past life.
     Soon the Englishwoman found herself telling her new acquaintance a great deal about her
     childhood and girlhood—something even of her brief, not unhappy, married life. But she shrank
     back, both mentally and physically, when Madame Wachner carelessly observed, "Ah, but soon you
     will marry again; no doubt you are already engaged?"
"Oh, no!" Sylvia shook her head.
"But you are young and beautiful. It would be a crime for you not to get married again!"
     Madame Wachner persisted; and then, "I love beauty," she cried enthusiastically. "You did not
     see me, Madame, last week, but I saw you, and I said to my 'usband, 'There is a very beautiful
     person come to Lacville, Fritz!' 'E laughed at me. 'Now you will be satisfied—now you will 'ave
     something to look at,' 'e says. And it is quite true! When I come back that night I was very
     sorry to see you not there. But we will meet often now," she concluded pleasantly, "for I
     suppose, Madame, that you too intend to play?"
That was the second time she had asked the question.
"I shall play a little," said Sylvia, blushing, "but of course I do not want to get into the
     habit of gambling."
"No, indeed, that would be terrible! And then there are not many who can afford to gamble and
     to lose their good money." She looked inquiringly at Sylvia. "But, there," she sighed—her fat
     face became very grave—"it is extraordinary 'ow some people manage to get money—I mean those
     'oo are determined to play!"
And then, changing the subject, Madame Wachner suddenly began to tell her new acquaintance
     all about the tragic death by drowning of her and her husband's friend at Aix-les-Bains the
     year before. She now spoke in French, but with a peculiar guttural accent.
"I never talk of it before Fritz," she said quickly, "but, of course, we both often think of
     it still. Oh, it was a terrible thing! We were devoted to this young Russian friend of ours. He
     and Fritz worked an excellent system together—the best Fritz ever invented—and for a little
     while they made money. But his terribly sad death broke our luck"—she shook her head
     ominously.
"How did it happen?" said Sylvia sympathetically.
And then Madame Wachner once again broke into her h-less English.
"They went together in a boat on Lake Bourget—it is a real lake, that lake, not like the
     little fishpond 'ere. A storm came on, and the boat upset. Fritz did his best to save the
     unfortunate one, but 'e could not swim. You can imagine my sensations? I was in a summer-'ouse,
     trembling with fright. Thunder, lightning, rain, storm, all round! Suddenly I see Fritz, pale
     as death, wet through, totter up the path from the lake. 'Where is Sasha?' I shriek out to 'im.
     And 'e shake 'is 'ead despairingly—Sasha was in the lake!"
The speaker stared before her with a look of vivid terror on her face. It was almost as if
     she saw the scene she was describing—nay, as if she saw the pale, dead face of the drowned man.
     It gave her companion a cold feeling of fear.
"And was it long before they found him?" asked Sylvia in a low tone.
"They never did find 'im," said Madame Wachner, her voice sinking to a whisper. "That was the
     extraordinary thing—Sasha's body was never found! Many people thought the money 'e 'ad on 'is
     person weighed 'im down, kept 'im entangled in the weeds at the bottom of the lake. Did not
     your friend tell you it made talk?"
"Yes," said Sylvia.
"'E 'ad not much money on 'is person," repeated Madame Wachner, "but still there was a good
     deal more than was found in 'is bed-room. That, of course, was 'anded over to the authorities.
     They insisted on keeping it."
"But I suppose his family got it in the end?" said Sylvia.
"No. 'E 'ad no family. You see, our friend was a Russian nobleman, but he had also been a
     Nihilist, so 'e 'ad concealed 'is identity. It was fortunate for us that we 'ad got to know an
     important person in the police; but for that we might 'ave 'ad much worry"—she shook her head.
     "They were so much annoyed that poor Sasha 'ad no passport. But, as I said to them—for Fritz
     quite lost 'is 'ead, and could say nothing—not 'alf, no, not a quarter of the strangers in Aix
     'as passports, though, of course, it is a good and useful thing to 'ave one. I suppose, Madame,
     that you 'ave a passport?"
She stopped short, and looked at Sylvia with that eager, inquiring look which demands an
     answer even to the most unimportant question.
"A passport?" repeated Sylvia Bailey, surprised. "No, indeed! I've never even seen one. Why
     should I have a passport?"
"When you are abroad it is always a good thing to 'ave a passport," said Madame Wachner
     quickly. "You see, it enables you to be identified. It gives your address at 'ome. But I do not
     think that you can get one now—no, it is a thing that one must get in one's own country, or, at
     any rate," she corrected herself, "in a country where you 'ave resided a long time."
"What is your country, Madame?" asked Sylvia. "Are you French? I suppose Monsieur Wachner is
     German?"
Madame Wachner shook her head.
"Oh, 'e would be cross to 'ear that! No, no, Fritz is Viennese—a gay Viennese! As for me, I
     am"—she waited a moment—"well, Madame, I am what the French call 'une vraie
      cosmopolite'—oh, yes, I am a true citizeness of the world."
They had been driving a considerable time, and at last the coachman, turning round on his
     seat, asked where they wished to go next.
"I ask you to come and 'ave tea with me," said Madame Wachner turning to Sylvia. "We are not
     very far from the Châlet des Muguets, and I 'ave some excellent tea there. We will 'ave a rest,
     and tell the man to come back for us in one hour. What do you think of that, Madame?"
"It is very kind of you," said Sylvia gratefully; and, indeed, she did think it very kind. It
     would be pleasant to rest a while in the Wachner's villa and have tea there.
Sylvia was in the mood to enjoy every new experience, however trifling, and she had never
     been in a French private house.
"Au Châlet des Muguets," called out Madame Wachner to the driver.
He nodded and turned his horse round.
Soon they were making their way along newly-made roads, cut through what had evidently been,
     not so very long before, a great stretch of forest land.
"The good people of Lacville are in a hurry to make money," observed Madame Wachner in
     French. "I am told that land here has nearly trebled in value the last few years, though houses
     are still cheap."
"It seems a pity they should destroy such beautiful woods," said Sylvia regretfully,
     remembering what the Comte de Virieu had said only that morning.
The other shrugged her shoulders, "I do not care for scenery—no, not at all!" she exclaimed
     complacently.
The carriage drew up with a jerk before a small white gate set in low, rough, wood palings.
     Behind the palings lay a large, straggling, and untidy garden, relieved from absolute ugliness
     by some high forest trees which had been allowed to remain when the house in the centre of the
     plot of ground was built.
Madame Wachner stepped heavily out of the carriage, and Sylvia followed her, feeling amused
     and interested. She wondered very much what the inside of the funny little villa she saw before
     her would be like. In any case, the outside of the Châlet des Muguets was almost ludicrously
     unlike the English houses to which she was accustomed.
Very strange, quaint, and fantastic looked the one-storey building, standing far higher than
     any bungalow Sylvia had ever seen, in a lawn of high, rank grass.
The walls of the Châlet des Muguets were painted bright pink, picked out with sham brown
     beams, which in their turn were broken at intervals by large blue china lozenges, on which were
     painted the giant branches of lilies-of-the-valley which gave the villa its inappropriate
     name!
The chocolate-coloured row of shutters were now closed to shut out the heat, for the sun beat
     down pitilessly on the little house, and the whole place had a curiously deserted, unlived-in
     appearance.
Sylvia secretly wondered how the Wachners could bear to leave the garden, which might have
     been made so pretty with a little care, in such a state of neglect and untidiness. Even the
     path leading up to the side of the house, where jutted out a mean-looking door, was covered
     with weeds.
But Madame Wachner was evidently very pleased with her temporary home, and quite satisfied
     with its surroundings.
"It is a pretty 'ouse, is it not?" she asked in English, and smiling broadly. "And only one
     thousand francs, furnished, for the 'ole season!"
Sylvia quickly made a mental calculation. Forty pounds? Yes, she supposed that was very
     cheap—for Lacville.
"We come in May, and we may stay till October," said Madame Wachner, still speaking in a
     satisfied tone. "I made a bargain with a woman from the town. She comes each morning, cooks
     what I want, and does the 'ousework. Often we 'ave our déjeuner out and dine at 'ome, or we
     dine close to the Casino—just as we choose. Food is so dear in France, it makes little
     difference whether we stay at 'ome or not for meals."
They were now close to the chocolate-coloured door of the Châlet, and Madame Wachner, to
     Sylvia Bailey's surprise and amusement, lifted a corner of the shabby outside mat, and took
     from under it a key. With it she opened the door. "Walk in," she said familiarly, "and welcome,
     Madame, to my 'ome!"
Sylvia found herself in a bare little hall, so bare indeed that there was not even a hat and
     umbrella stand there.
Her hostess walked past her and opened a door which gave into a darkened room.
"This is our dining-room," she said proudly. "Walk in, Madame. It is 'ere we had better 'ave
     tea, perhaps."
Sylvia followed her. How dark, and how very hot it was in here! She could see absolutely
     nothing for some moments, for she was blinded by the sudden change from the bright light of the
     hall to the dim twilight of the closely-shuttered room.
Then gradually she began to see everything—or rather the little there was to be seen—and she
     felt surprised, and a little disappointed.
The dining-room was more than plainly furnished; it was positively ugly.
The furniture consisted of a round table standing on an unpolished parquet floor, of six cane
     chairs set against the wall, and of a walnut-wood buffet, on the shelves of which stood no
     plates, or ornaments of any description. The walls were distempered a reddish-pink colour, and
     here and there the colour had run in streaky patches.
"Is it not charming?" exclaimed Madame Wachner. "And now I will show you our pretty little
     salon!"
Sylvia followed her out into the hall, and so to the left into the short passage which ran
     down the centre of the tiny house.
The drawing-room of the Châlet des Muguets was a little larger than the dining-room, but it
     was equally bare of anything pretty or even convenient. There was a small sofa, covered with
     cheap tapestry, and four uncomfortable-looking chairs to match; on the sham marble mantelpiece
     stood a gilt and glass clock and two chandeliers. There was not a book, not a paper, not a
     flower.
Both rooms gave Sylvia a strange impression that they were very little lived in. But then, of
     course, the Wachners were very little at home.
"And now I will get tea," said Madame Wachner triumphantly.
"Will you not let me help you?" asked Sylvia, timidly. "I love making tea—every Englishwoman
     loves making tea." She had no wish to be left in this dull, ugly little drawing-room by
     herself.
"Oh, but your pretty dress! Would it not get 'urt in the kitchen?" cried Madame Wachner
     deprecatingly.
But she allowed Sylvia to follow her into the bright, clean little kitchen, of which the door
     was just opposite the drawing-room.
"What a charming little cuisine!" cried Sylvia smiling. She was glad to find
     something that she could honestly praise, and the kitchen was, in truth, the pleasantest place
     in the house, exquisitely neat, with the brass batterie de cuisine shining and bright.
     "Your day servant must be an exceptionally clean woman."
"Yes," said Madame Wachner, in a rather dissatisfied tone, "she is well enough. But, oh,
     those French people, how eager they are for money! Do you suppose that woman ever stays one
     minute beyond her time? No, indeed!"
Even as she spoke she was pouring water into a little kettle, and lighting a spirit lamp.
     Then, going to a cupboard, she took out two cups and a cracked china teapot.
Sylvia did her part by cutting some bread and butter, and, as she stood at the white table
     opposite the kitchen window, she saw that beyond the small piece of garden which lay at the
     back of the house was a dense chestnut wood, only separated from the Châlet des Muguets by a
     straggling hedge.
"Does the wood belong to you, too?" she asked.
Madame Wachner shook her head.
"Oh! no," she said, "that is for sale!"
"You must find it very lonely here at night," said Sylvia, musingly, "you do not seem to have
     any neighbours either to the right or left."
"There is a villa a little way down the road," said Madame Wachner quickly. "But we are not
     nervous people—and then we 'ave nothing it would be worth anybody's while to steal."
Sylvia reminded herself that the Wachners must surely have a good deal of money in the house
     if they gambled as much as Anna Wolsky said they did. Her hostess could not keep it all in the
     little bag which she always carried hung on her wrist.
And then, as if Madame Wachner had seen straight into her mind, the old woman said
     significantly. "As to our money, I will show you where we keep it. Come into my bed-room;
     perhaps you will take off your hat there; then we shall be what English people call
     'cosy.'"
Madame Wachner led the way again into the short passage, and so into a large bed-room, which
     looked, like the kitchen, on to the back garden.
After the kitchen, this bed-room struck Sylvia as being the pleasantest room in the Châlet
     des Muguets, and that although, like the dining-room and drawing-room, it was extraordinarily
     bare.
There was no chest of drawers, no dressing-table, no cupboard to be seen. Madame Wachner's
     clothes hung on pegs behind the door, and there was a large brass-bound trunk in a corner of
     the room.
But the broad, low bed looked very comfortable, and there was a bath-room next door.
Madame Wachner showed her guest the bath-room with great pride.
"This is the 'English comfortable,'" she said, using the quaint phrase the French have
     invented to express the acme of domestic luxury. "My 'usband will never allow me to take a
     'ouse that has no bath-room. 'E is very clean about 'imself"—she spoke as if it was a fact to
     be proud of, and Sylvia could not help smiling.
"I suppose there are still many French houses without a bath-room," she said.
"Yes," said Madame Wachner quickly, "the French are not a clean people,"—she shook her head
     scornfully.
"I suppose you keep your money in that box?" said Sylvia, looking at the brass-bound
     trunk.
"No, indeed! This is where I keep it!"
Madame Wachner suddenly lifted her thin alpaca skirt, and Sylvia, with astonishment, saw that
     hung round her capacious waist were a number of little wash-leather bags. "My money is all
     'ere!" exclaimed Madame Wachner, laughing heartily. "It rests—oh, so cosily—against my
     petticoat."
They went back into the kitchen. The water was boiling, and Sylvia made the tea, Madame
     Wachner looking on with eager interest.
"La! La! it will be strong! I only put a pinch for ourselves. And now go into the
     dining-room, and I will bring the teapot there to you, Madame!"
"No, no," said Sylvia laughing, "why should we not drink our tea here, in this pretty
     kitchen?"
The other looked at her doubtfully. "Shall we?"
"Yes, of course!" cried Sylvia.
They drew up two rush-bottomed chairs to the table and sat down.
Sylvia thoroughly enjoyed this first taste of Madame Wachner's hospitality. The drive and the
     great heat had made her feel tired and languid, and the tea did her good.
"I will go and see if the carriage is there," said Madame Wachner at last.
While her hostess was away, Sylvia looked round her with some curiosity.
What an extraordinary mode of life these people had chosen for themselves! If the Wachners
     were rich enough to gamble, surely they had enough money to live more comfortably than they
     were now doing? It was clear that they hardly used the dining-room and drawing-room of the
     little villa at all. When Sylvia had been looking for the butter, she had not been able to help
     seeing that in the tiny larder there was only a small piece of cheese, a little cold meat, and
     a couple of eggs on a plate. No wonder Monsieur Wachner had heartily enjoyed the copious, if
     rather roughly-prepared, meal at the Pension Malfait.
"Yes, the carriage is there," said Madame Wachner bustling back. "And now we must be quick,
     or L'Ami Fritz will be cross! Do you know that absurd man actually still thinks 'e is master,
     and yet we 'ave been married—oh, I do not know 'ow many years! But he always loves seeing me
     even after we 'ave been separated but two hours or so!"
Together they went out, Madame Wachner carefully locking the door and hiding the key where
     she had found it, under the mat outside.
Sylvia could not help laughing.
"I really wonder you do that," she observed. "Just think how easy it would be for anyone to
     get into the house!"
"Yes, that is true, but there is nothing to steal. As I tell you, we always carry our money
     about with us," said Madame Wachner. She added in a serious tone, "and I should advise you to
     do so too, my dear young friend."
A quarter of an hour's sharp driving brought Sylvia and Madame Wachner to the door of the
     Casino. They found Madame Wolsky in the hall waiting for them.
"I couldn't think what had happened to you!" she exclaimed in an anxious tone. "But here is
     your membership card, Sylvia. Now you are free of the Baccarat tables!"
Monsieur Wachner met his wife with a frowning face. He might be pleased to see Madame
     Wachner, but he showed his pleasure in an odd manner. Soon, however, the secret of his angry
     look was revealed, for Madame Wachner opened the leather bag hanging from her wrist and took
     out of it a hundred francs.
"Here, Fritz," she cried, gaily. "You can now begin your play!"
Sylvia Bailey felt very much amused. So poor "Ami Fritz" was not allowed to gamble unless his
     wife were there to see that he did not go too far. No wonder he had looked impatient and eager,
     as well as cross! He had been engaged—that was clear—in putting down the turns of the game, and
     in working out what were no doubt abstruse calculations connected with his system.
The Club was very full, and it was a little difficult at that hour of the late afternoon to
     get near enough to a table to play comfortably; but a stranger had kindly kept Anna Wolsky's
     place for her.
"I have been quite lucky," she whispered to Sylvia. "I have made three hundred francs, and
     now I think I will rest a bit! Slip in here, dear, and I will stand behind you. I do not advise
     you to risk more than twenty francs the first time; on the other hand, if you feel en
      veine, if the luck seems persistent—it sometimes is when one first plays with gold—then
     be bold, and do not hesitate!"
Sylvia, feeling rather bewildered, slipped into her friend's place, and Anna kept close
     behind her.
With a hand that trembled a little, she put a twenty-franc piece down on the green table.
     After doing so she looked up, and saw that the Comte de Virieu was standing nearly opposite to
     her, on the other side of the table.
His eyes were fixed on her, and there was a very kind and indulgent, if sad, smile on his
     face. As their glances met he leant forward and also put a twenty-franc piece on the green
     cloth close to where Sylvia's money lay.
The traditional words rang out: "Faites vos jeux, Messieurs, Mesdames! Le jeu est fait!
      Rien ne va plus!"
And then Sylvia saw her stake and that of the Count doubled. There were now four gold pieces
     where two had been.
"Leave your money on, and see what happens," whispered Anna. "After all you are only risking
     twenty francs!"
And Sylvia obediently followed the advice.
Again there came a little pause; once more the words which she had not yet learnt to
     understand rang out in the croupier's monotonous voice.
She looked round her; there was anxiety and watchful suspense on all the eager faces. The
     Comte de Virieu alone looked indifferent.
A moment later four gold pieces were added to the four already there.
"You had better take up your winnings, or someone may claim them," muttered Anna
     anxiously.
"Oh, but I don't like to do that," said Sylvia.
"Of course you must!"
She put out her hand and took up her four gold pieces, leaving those of the Count on the
     table. Then suddenly she put back the eighty francs on the cloth, and smiled up at him; it was
     a gay little shame-faced smile. "Please don't be cross with me, kind friend,"—that is what
     Sylvia's smile seemed to say to Paul de Virieu—"but this is so very exciting!"
He felt stirred to the heart. How sweet, how confidingly simple she looked! And—and how very
     beautiful. He at once loved and hated to see her there, his new little "amie
     Anglaise!"
"Are you going to leave the whole of it on this time?" whispered Anna.
"Yes, I think I will. It's rather fun. After all, I'm only risking twenty francs!" whispered
     back Sylvia.
And once more she won.
"What a pity you didn't start playing with a hundred francs! Think of how rich you would be
     now," said Anna, with the true gambler's instinct. "But it is clear, child, that you are going
     to do well this evening, and I shall follow your luck! Take the money off now, however."
Sylvia waited to see what the Count would do. Their eyes asked and answered the same
     question. He gave an imperceptible nod, and she took up her winnings—eight gold pieces!
It was well that she had done so, for the next deal of the cards favoured the banker.
Then something very surprising happened to Sylvia.
Someone—she thought it was Monsieur Wachner—addressed the croupier whose duty it was to deal
     out the cards, and said imperiously, "A Madame la main!"
Hardly knowing what she was doing, Sylvia took up the cards which had been pushed towards
     her. A murmur of satisfaction ran round the table, for there lay what even she had learnt by
     now was the winning number, a nine of hearts, and the second card was the king of clubs.
Again and again, she turned up winning numbers—the eight and the ace, the five and the four,
     the six and the three—every combination which brought luck to the table and confusion to the
     banker.
Eyes full of adoring admiration, aye and gratitude, were turned on the young Englishwoman.
     Paul de Virieu alone did not look at her. But he followed her play.
"Now put on a hundred francs," said Anna, authoritatively.
Sylvia looked at her, rather surprised by the advice, but she obeyed it. And still the Comte
     de Virieu followed her lead.
That made her feel dreadfully nervous and excited—it would be so terrible to make him lose
     too!
Neither of them lost. On the contrary, ten napoleons were added to the double pile of
     gold.
And then, after that, it seemed as if the whole table were following Sylvia's game.
"That pretty Englishwoman is playing for the first time!"—so the word went round. And they
     all began backing her luck with feverish haste.
The banker, a good-looking young Frenchman, stared at Sylvia ruefully. Thanks to her, he was
     being badly punished. Fortunately, he could afford it.
At the end of half an hour, feeling tired and bewildered by her good fortune, Mrs. Bailey got
     up and moved away from the table, the possessor of £92. The Comte Virieu had won exactly the
     same amount.
Now everybody looked pleased except the banker. For the first time a smile irradiated
     Monsieur Wachner's long face.
As for Madame Wachner, she was overjoyed. Catching Sylvia by the hand, she exclaimed, in her
     curious, woolly French, "I would like to embrace you! But I know that English ladies do not
     like kissing in public. It is splendid—splendid! Look at all the people you have made
     happy."
"But how about the poor banker?" asked Sylvia, blushing.
"Oh, 'e is all right. 'E is very rich."
Madame Wolsky, like the Count, had exactly followed her friend's play, but not as soon as he
     had done. Still, she also had made over £80.
"Two thousand francs!" she cried, joyfully. "That is very good for a beginning. And you?" she
     turned to Monsieur Wachner.
He hesitated, and looked at his wife deprecatingly.
"L'Ami Fritz," said Madame Wachner, "will play 'is system, Mesdames. However, I am
     glad to say that to-day he soon gave it up in honour of our friend here. What 'ave you made?"
     she asked him.
"Only eight hundred francs," he said, his face clouding over. "If you had given me more than
     that hundred francs, Sophie, I might have made five thousand in the time."
"Bah!" she said. "That does not matter. We must not risk more than a hundred francs a day—you
     know how often I've told you that, Fritz." She was now speaking in French, very quickly and
     angrily.
But Sylvia hardly heard. She could not help wondering why the Count had not come up and
     congratulated her. The thought that she had brought him luck was very pleasant to her.
He had left off playing, and was standing back, near one of the windows. He had not even
     glanced across to the place where she stood. This aloofness gave Sylvia a curious little
     feeling of discomfiture. Why, several strangers had come up and cordially thanked her for
     bringing them such luck.
"Let us come out of this place and 'ave some ices," exclaimed Madame Wachner, suddenly. "When
     l'Ami Fritz 'as a stroke of luck 'e often treats 'is old wife to an ice."
The four went out of the Casino and across the way to an hotel, which, as Madame Wachner
     explained to her two new friends, contained the best restaurant in Lacville. The sun was
     sinking, and, though it was still very hot, there was a pleasant breeze coming up from the
     lake.
Sylvia felt excited and happy. How wonderful—how marvellous—to make nearly £100 out of a
     twenty-franc piece! That was what she had done this afternoon.
And then, rather to her surprise, after they had all enjoyed ices and cakes at Madame
     Wachner's expense, Anna Wolsky and l'Ami Fritz declared they were going back to the Casino.
"I don't mean to play again to-night," said Sylvia, firmly. "I feel dreadfully tired," and
     the excitement had indeed worn her out. She longed to go back to the Hôtel du Lac.
Still, she accompanied the others to the Club, and together with Madame Wachner, she sat down
     some way from the tables. In a very few minutes they were joined by the other two, who had by
     now lost quite enough gold pieces to make them both feel angry with themselves, and, what was
     indeed unfair, with poor Sylvia.
"I'm sure that if you had played again, and if we had followed your play, we should have
     added to our winnings instead of losing, as we have done," said Anna crossly.
"I'm so sorry," and Sylvia felt really distressed. Anna had never spoken crossly to her
     before.
"Forgive me!" cried the Polish woman, suddenly softening. "I ought not to have said that to
     you, dear little friend. No doubt we should all have lost just the same. You know that
     fortune-teller told me that I should make plenty of money—well, even now I have had a splendid
     day!"
"Do come back with me and have dinner at the Villa du Lac," said Sylvia eagerly.
They shook hands with the Wachners, and as they walked the short distance from the Casino to
     the villa, Sylvia told Anna all about her visit to the Châlet des Muguets.
"They seem nice homely people," she said, "and Madame Wachner was really very kind."
"Yes, no doubt; but she is a very strict wife," answered Anna smiling. "The poor man had not
     one penny piece till she came in, and he got so angry and impatient waiting for her! I really
     felt inclined to lend him a little money; but I have made it a rule never to lend money in a
     Casino; it only leads to unpleasantness afterwards."
In the hall of the Villa du Lac the Comte de Virieu was standing reading a paper. He was
     dressed for dinner, and he bowed distantly as the two ladies came in.
"Why, there is the Comte de Virieu!" exclaimed Anna, in a low, and far from a pleased tone.
     "I had no idea he was staying here."
"Yes, he is staying here," said Sylvia, blushing uneasily, and quickly she led the way
     upstairs. It wanted a few minutes to seven.
Anna Wolsky waited till the door of Sylvia's room was shut, and then,
"I cannot help being sorry that you are staying in the same hotel as that man," she said,
     seriously. "Do not get to know him too well, dear Sylvia. The Count is a worthless individual;
     he has gambled away two fortunes. And now, instead of working, he is content to live on an
     allowance made to him by his sister's husband, the Duc d'Eglemont. If I were you, I should keep
     on very distant terms with him. He is, no doubt, always looking out for a nice rich woman to
     marry."
Sylvia made no answer. She felt she could not trust herself to speak; and there came over her
     a feeling of intense satisfaction that Anna Wolsky was not staying here with her at the Villa
     du Lac.
She also made up her mind that next time she entertained Anna she would do so at the
     restaurant of which the cooking had been so highly commended by Madame Wachner.
The fact that Madame Wolsky thought so ill of the Comte de Virieu made Sylvia feel
     uncomfortable all through dinner. But the Count, though he again bowed when the two friends
     came into the dining-room, did not come over and speak to them, as Sylvia had felt sure he
     would do this evening.
After dinner he disappeared, and Sylvia took Anna out into the garden. But she did not show
     her the potager. The old kitchen-garden already held for her associations which she
     did not wish to spoil or even to disturb.
Madame Wolsky, sipping M. Polperro's excellent coffee, again mentioned the Count.
"I am exceedingly surprised to see him here at Lacville," she said in a musing voice, "I
     should have expected him to go to a more chic place. He always plays in the winter at
     Monte Carlo."
Sylvia summoned up courage to protest.
"But, Anna," she exclaimed, "surely the Comte de Virieu is only doing what a great many other
     people do!"
Anna laughed good-humouredly.
"I see what you mean," she said. "You think it is a case of 'the pot calling the kettle
     black.' How excellent are your English proverbs, dear Sylvia! But no, it is quite different.
     Take me. I have an income, and choose to spend it in gambling. I might prefer to have a big
     house, or perhaps I should say a small house, for I am not a very rich woman. But no, I like
     play, and I am free to spend my money as I like. The Comte de Virieu is very differently
     situated! He is, so I've been told, a clever, cultivated man. He ought to be working—doing
     something for his country's good. And then he is so disagreeable! He makes no friends, no
     acquaintances. He always looks as if he was doing something of which he was ashamed. He never
     appears gay or satisfied, not even when he is winning—"
"He does not look as cross as Monsieur Wachner," said Sylvia, smiling.
"Monsieur Wachner is like me," said Anna calmly. "He probably made a fortune in business, and
     now he and his wife enjoy risking a little money at play. Why should they not?"
"Madame Wachner told me to-day all about their poor friend who was drowned," said Sylvia
     irrelevantly.
"Ah, yes, that was a sad affair! They were very foolish to become so intimate with him. Why,
     they actually had him staying with them at the time! You see, they had a villa close to the
     lake-side. And this young Russian, it appears, was very fond of boating. It was a mysterious
     affair, because, oddly enough, he had not been out in the town, or even to the Casino, for four
     days before the accident happened. There was a notion among some people that he had committed
     suicide, but that, I fancy, was not so. He had won a large sum of money. Some thought the gold
     weighed down his body in the water—. But that is absurd. It must have been the weeds."
"Madame Wachner told me that quite a lot of money was found in his room," said Sylvia
     quickly.
"No, that is not true. About four hundred francs were found in his bed-room. That was all. I
     fancy the police made themselves rather unpleasant to Monsieur Wachner. The Russian Embassy
     made inquiries, and it seemed so odd to the French authorities that the poor fellow could not
     be identified. They found no passport, no papers of any sort—"
"Have you a passport?" asked Sylvia. "Madame Wachner asked me if I had one. But I've never
     even seen a passport!"
"No," said Anna, "I have not got a passport now. I once had one, but I lost it. One does not
     require such a thing in a civilised country! But a Russian must always have a passport, it is
     an absolute law in Russia. And the disappearance of that young man's passport was certainly
     strange—in fact, the whole affair was mysterious."
"It must have been terrible for Monsieur and Madame Wachner," said Sylvia thoughtfully.
"Oh yes, very disagreeable indeed! Luckily he is entirely absorbed in his absurd systems, and
     she is a very cheerful woman."
"Yes, indeed she is!" Sylvia could not help smiling. "I am glad we have got to know them,
     Anna. It is rather mournful when one knows no one at all in a place of this kind."
And Anna agreed, indifferently.
And then there began a series of long cloudless days for Sylvia Bailey. For the first time
     she felt as if she was seeing life, and such seeing was very pleasant to her.
Not in her wildest dreams, during the placid days of her girlhood and brief married life, had
     she conceived of so interesting and so exhilarating an existence as that which she was now
     leading! And this was perhaps owing in a measure to the fact that there is, if one may so
     express it, a spice of naughtiness in life as led at Lacville.
In a mild, a very mild, way Sylvia Bailey had fallen a victim to the Goddess of Play. She
     soon learned to look forward to the hours she and Anna Wolsky spent each day at the baccarat
     tables. But, unlike Anna, Sylvia was never tempted to risk a greater sum on that dangerous
     green cloth than she could comfortably afford to lose, and perhaps just because this was so, on
     the whole she won money rather than lost it.
A certain change had come over the relations of the two women. They still met daily, if only
     at the Casino, and they occasionally took a walk or a drive together, but Madame Wolsky—and
     Sylvia Bailey felt uneasy and growing concern that it was so—now lived for play, and play
     alone.
Absorbed in the simple yet fateful turns of the game, Anna would remain silent for hours,
     immersed in calculations, and scarcely aware of what went on round her. She and Monsieur
     Wachner—"L'Ami Fritz," as even Sylvia had fallen into the way of calling him—seemed scarcely
     alive unless they were standing or sitting round a baccarat table, putting down or taking up
     the shining gold pieces which they treated as carelessly as if they were counters.
But it was not the easy, idle, purposeless life she was now leading that brought the pretty
     English widow that strange, unacknowledged feeling of entire content with life.
What made existence at Lacville so exciting and so exceptionally interesting to Sylvia Bailey
     was her friendship with Comte Paul de Virieu.
There is in every woman a passion for romance, and in Sylvia this passion had been baulked,
     not satisfied, by her first marriage.
Bill Chester loved her well and deeply, but he was her lawyer and trustee as well as her
     lover. He had an honest, straightforward nature, and when with her something always prompted
     Chester to act the part of candid friend, and the part of candid friend fits in very ill with
     that of lover. To take but one example of how ill his honesty of purpose served him in the
     matter, Sylvia had never really forgiven him the "fuss" he had made about her string of
     pearls.
But with the Comte de Virieu she never quite knew what to be at, and mystery is the food of
     romance.
At the Villa du Lac the two were almost inseparable, and yet so intelligently and quietly did
     the Count arrange their frequent meetings—their long walks and talks in the large deserted
     garden, their pleasant morning saunters through the little town—that no one, or so Sylvia
     believed, was aware of any special intimacy between them.
Sometimes, as they paced up and down the flower-bordered paths of the old kitchen-garden, or
     when, tired of walking, they made their way into the orangery and sat down on the circular
     stone bench by the fountain, Sylvia would remember, deep in her heart, the first time Count
     Paul had brought her there; and how she had been a little frightened, not perhaps altogether
     unpleasantly so, by his proximity!
She had feared—but she was now deeply ashamed of having entertained such a thought—that he
     might suddenly begin making violent love to her, that he might perhaps try to kiss her! Were
     not all Frenchmen of his type rather gay dogs?
But nothing—nothing of the sort had ever been within measurable distance of happening. On the
     contrary, he always treated her with scrupulous respect, and he never—and this sometimes piqued
     Sylvia—made love to her, or attempted to flirt with her. Instead, he talked to her in that
     intimate, that confiding fashion which a woman finds so attractive in a man when she has reason
     to believe his confidences are made to her alone.
When Bill Chester asked her not to do something she desired to do, Sylvia felt annoyed and
     impatient, but when Count Paul, as she had fallen into the way of calling him, made no secret
     of his wish that she should give up play, Sylvia felt touched and pleased that he should
     care.
Early in their acquaintance the Count had warned her against making casual friendships in the
     Gambling Rooms, and he even did not like her knowing—this amused Sylvia—the harmless
     Wachners.
When he saw her talking to Madame Wachner in the Club, Count Paul would look across the
     baccarat table and there would come a little frown over his eyes—a frown she alone could
     see.
And as the days went on, and as their intimacy seemed to grow closer and ever closer, there
     came across Sylvia a deep wordless wish—and she had never longed for anything so much in her
     life—to rescue her friend from what he admitted to be his terrible vice of gambling. In this
     she showed rather a feminine lack of logic, for, while wishing to wean him from his vice, she
     did not herself give up going to the Casino.
She would have been angry indeed had the truth been whispered to her, the truth that it was
     not so much her little daily gamble—as Madame Wachner called it—that made Sylvia so faithful an
     attendant at the Club; it was because when there she was still with Paul de Virieu, she could
     see and sympathise with him when he was winning, and grieve when he was losing, as alas! he
     often lost.
When they were not at the Casino the Comte de Virieu very seldom alluded to his play, or to
     the good or ill fortune which might have befallen him that day. When with her he tried, so much
     was clear to Sylvia, to forget his passion for gambling.
But this curious friendship of hers with Count Paul only occupied, in a material sense, a
     small part of Sylvia's daily life at Lacville; and the people with whom she spent most of her
     time were still Anna Wolsky and Monsieur and Madame Wachner, or perhaps it should be said
     Madame Wachner.
It was not wonderful that Mrs. Bailey liked the cheerful woman, who was so bright and jovial
     in manner, and who knew, too, how to flatter so cleverly. When with Madame Wachner Sylvia was
     made to feel that she was not only very pretty, but also immensely attractive, and just now she
     was very anxious to think herself both.
Late one afternoon—and they all four always met each afternoon at the Casino—Madame Wachner
     suddenly invited Sylvia and Anna to come back to supper at the Châlet des Muguets.
Anna was unwilling to accept the kindly invitation. It was clear that she did not wish to
     waste as much time away from the Casino as going to the Wachners' villa would involve. But,
     seeing that Sylvia was eager to go, she gave way.
Now on this particular afternoon Sylvia was feeling rather dull, and, as she expressed it to
     herself, "down on her luck," for the Comte de Virieu had gone into Paris for a few hours.
His sister, the Duchesse d'Eglemont, had come up from the country for a few days, and the
     great pleasure and delight he had expressed at the thought of seeing her had given the young
     English widow a little pang of pain. It made her feel how little she counted in his life after
     all.
And so, for the second time, Sylvia visited the odd, fantastic-looking Châlet des Muguets,
     and under very pleasant auspices.
This evening the bare dining-room she had thought so ugly wore an air of festivity. There
     were flowers on the round table and on the buffet, but, to her surprise, a piece of oilcloth
     now hid the parquet floor. This puzzled Sylvia, as such trifling little matters of fact often
     puzzle a fresh young mind. Surely the oilcloth had not been there on her last visit to the
     villa? She remembered clearly the unpolished parquet floor.
Thanks to the hostess and to Sylvia herself, supper was a bright, merry meal. There was a
     variety of cold meats, some fine fruit, and a plate of dainty pastry.
They all waited on one another, though Madame Wachner insisted on doing most of the work. But
     L'Ami Fritz, for once looking cheerful and eager, mixed the salad, putting in even more vinegar
     than oil, as Mrs. Bailey laughingly confessed that she hated olive oil!
After they had eaten their appetising little meal, the host went off into the kitchen where
     Sylvia had had tea on her first visit to the Châlet, and there he made the most excellent
     coffee for them all, and even Mrs. Bailey, who was treated as the guest of honour, though she
     knew that coffee was not good for her, was tempted into taking some.
One thing, however, rather dashed her pleasure in the entertainment.
Madame Wachner, forgetting for once her usual tact, suddenly made a violent attack on the
     Comte de Virieu.
They were all talking of the habitués of the Casino: "The only one I do not like," she
     exclaimed, in French, "is that Count—if indeed Count he be? He is so arrogant, so proud, so
     rude! We have known him for years, have L'Ami Fritz and I, for we are always running across him
     at Monte Carlo and other places. But no, each time we meet he looks at us as if he was a fish.
     He does not even nod!"
"When the Comte de Virieu is actually playing, he does not know that other people exist,"
     said Anna Wolsky, slowly.
She had looked across at Sylvia and noticed her English friend's blush and look of
     embarrassment. "I used to watch him two years ago at Monte Carlo, and I have never seen a man
     more absorbed in his play."
"That is no excuse!" cried Madame Wachner, scornfully. "Besides, that is only half the truth.
     He is ashamed of the way he is spending his life, and he hates the people who see him doing it!
     It is shameful to be so idle. A strong young man doing nothing, living on charity, so they say!
     And he despises all those who do what he himself is not ashamed to do."
And Sylvia, looking across at her, said to herself with a heavy sigh that this was true.
     Madame Wachner had summed up Count Paul very accurately.
At last there came the sound of a carriage in the quiet lane outside.
"Fritz! Go and see if that is the carriage I ordered to come here at nine o'clock," said his
     wife sharply; and then, as he got up silently to obey her, she followed him out into the
     passage, and Sylvia, who had very quick ears, heard her say, in low, vehement tones, "I work
     and work and work, but you do nothing! Do try and help me—it is for your sake I am taking all
     this trouble!"
What could these odd words mean? At what was Madame Wachner working?
A sudden feeling of discomfort came over Sylvia. Then the stout, jolly-looking woman was not
     without private anxieties and cares? There had been something so weary as well as so angry in
     the tone in which Madame Wachner spoke to her beloved "Ami Fritz."
A moment later he was hurrying towards the gate.
"Sophie," he cried out from the garden, "the carriage is here! Come along—we have wasted too
     much time already—"
Like Anna Wolsky, Monsieur Wachner grudged every moment spent away from the tables.
Madame Wachner hurried her two guests into her bed-room to put on their hats.
Anna Wolsky walked over to the window.
"What a strange, lonely place to live in!" she said, and drew the lace shawl she was wearing
     a little more closely about her thin shoulders. "And that wood over there—I should be afraid to
     live so near a wood! I should think that there might be queer people concealed there."
"Bah! Why should we be frightened, even if there were queer people there!"
"Well, but sometimes you must have a good deal of money in this house."
Madame Wachner laughed.
"When we have so much money that we cannot carry it about, and that, alas! is not very
     often—but still, when Fritz makes a big win, we go into Paris and bank the money."
"I do not trouble to do that," said Anna, "for I always carry all my money about with me.
     What do you do?" she turned to Sylvia Bailey.
"I leave it in my trunk at the hotel," said Sylvia. "The servants at the Villa du Lac seem to
     be perfectly honest—in fact they are mostly related to the proprietor, M. Polperro."
"Oh, but that is quite wrong!" exclaimed Madame Wachner, eagerly. "You should never leave
     your money in the hotel; you should always carry it about with you—in little bags like this.
     See!"
Again she suddenly lifted the light alpaca skirt she was wearing, as she had done before, in
     this very room, on the occasion of Sylvia's first visit to the Châlet. "That is the way to
     carry money in a place like this!" she said, smiling. "But now hurry, or all our evening will
     be gone!"
They left the house, and hastened down the garden to the gate, where L'Ami Fritz received his
     wife with a grumbling complaint that they had been so long.
And he was right, for the Casino was very full. Sylvia made no attempt to play. Somehow she
     did not care for the Club when Count Paul was not there.
She was glad when she was at last able to leave the others for the Villa du Lac.
Anna Wolsky accompanied her friend to the entrance of the Casino. The Comte de Virieu was
     just coming in as Sylvia went out; bowing distantly to the two ladies, he hurried through the
     vestibule towards the Club.
Sylvia's heart sank. Not even after spending a day with his beloved sister could he resist
     the lure of play!
During much of the night that followed Sylvia lay awake, her mind full of the Comte de
     Virieu, and of the strange friendship which had sprung up between them.
Their brief meeting at the door of the Casino had affected her very painfully. As he had
     passed her with a distant bow, a look of shame, of miserable unease, had come over Count Paul's
     face.
Yes, Madame Wachner had summed him up very shrewdly, if unkindly. He was ashamed, not only of
     the way in which he was wasting his life, but also of the company into which his indulgence of
     his vice of gambling brought him.
And Sylvia—it was a bitter thought—was of that company. That fact must be faced by her. True,
     she was not a gambler in the sense that most of the people she met and saw daily at the Casino
     were gamblers, but that was simply because the passion of play did not absorb her as it did
     them. It was her good fortune, not any virtue in herself, that set her apart from Anna
     Wolsky.
And now she asked herself—or rather her conscience asked her—whether she would not do well to
     leave Lacville; to break off this strange and—yes, this dangerous intimacy with a man of whom
     she knew so very little, apart from the great outstanding fact that he was a confirmed gambler,
     and that he had given up all that makes life worth living to such a man as he, in order to drag
     on a dishonoured, purposeless life at one or other of the great gambling centres of the
     civilised world?
And yet the thought of going away from Lacville was already intolerable to Sylvia. There had
     arisen between the Frenchman and herself a kind of close, wordless understanding and sympathy
     which she, at any rate, still called "friendship." But she would probably have assented to
     Meredith's words, "Friendship, I fancy, means one heart between two."
At last she fell into a troubled sleep, and dreamt a disturbing dream.
She found herself wandering about the Châlet des Muguets, trying to find a way out of the
     locked and shuttered building. The ugly little rooms were empty. It was winter, and she was
     shivering with cold. Someone must have locked her in by mistake. She had been forgotten....
"Toc, toc, toc!" at the door. And Sylvia sat up in bed relieved of her nightmare. It was
     eight o'clock! She had overslept herself. Félicie was bringing in her tea, and on the tray lay
     a letter addressed in a handwriting Sylvia did not know, and on which was a French stamp.
She turned the pale-grey envelope over doubtfully, wondering if it was really meant for her.
     But yes—of that there could be no doubt, for it was addressed, "Madame Bailey, Villa du Lac,
     Lacville-les-Bains."
She opened it to find that the note contained a gracefully-worded invitation to déjeuner for
     the next day, and the signature ran—"Marie-Anne d'Eglemont."
Why, it must be Paul de Virieu's sister! How very kind of her, and—and how very kind of
      him.
The letter must have been actually written when Count Paul was in Paris with his sister—and
     yet, when they had passed one another the evening before, he had bowed as distantly, as coldly,
     as he might have done to the most casual of acquaintances.
Sylvia got up, filled with a tumult of excited feeling which this simple invitation to
     luncheon scarcely warranted.
But Paul de Virieu came in from his ride also eager, excited, smiling.
"Have you received a note from my sister?" he asked, hurrying towards her in the dining-room
     which they now had to themselves each morning. "When I told her how you and I had become"—he
     hesitated a moment, and then added the words, "good friends, she said how much she would like
     to meet you. I know that you and my dear Marie-Anne would like one another—"
"It is very kind of your sister to ask me to come and see her," said Sylvia, a little
     stiffly.
"I am going back to Paris this evening," he went on, "to stay with my sister for a couple of
     nights. So if you can come to-morrow to lunch, as I think my sister has asked you to do, I will
     meet you at the station."
After breakfast they went out into the garden, and when they were free of the house Count
     Paul said suddenly,
"I told Marie-Anne that you were fond of riding, and, with your permission, she proposes to
     send over a horse for you every morning. And, Madame—forgive me—but I told her I feared you had
     no riding habit! You and she, however, are much the same height, and she thinks that she might
     be able to lend you one if you will honour her by accepting the loan of it during the time you
     are at Lacville."
Sylvia was bewildered, she scarcely knew how to accept so much kindness.
"If you will write a line to my sister some time to-day," continued the Count, "I will be the
     bearer of your letter."
That day marked a very great advance in the friendship of Sylvia Bailey and Paul de
     Virieu.
Till that day, much as he had talked to her about himself and his life, and the many curious
     adventures he had had, for he had travelled a great deal, and was a cultivated man, he had very
     seldom spoken to her of his relations.
But to-day he told her a great deal about them, and she found herself taking a very keen,
     intimate interest in this group of French people whom she had never seen—whom, perhaps, with
     one exception, she never would see.
How unlike English folk they must be—these relations of Count Paul! For the matter of that,
     how unlike any people Sylvia had ever seen or heard of.
First, he told her of the sweet-natured, pious young duchess who was to be her hostess on the
     morrow—the sister whom Paul loved so dearly, and to whom he owed so much.
Then he described, in less kindly terms, her proud narrow-minded, if generous, husband, the
     French duke who still lived—thanks to the fact that his grandmother had been the daughter of a
     great Russian banker—much as must have lived the nobles in the Middle Ages—apart, that is, from
     everything that would remind him that there was anything in the world of which he disapproved
     or which he disliked.
The Duc d'Eglemont ignored the fact that France was a Republic; he still talked of "the
     King," and went periodically into waiting on the Duke of Orleans.
Count Paul also told Sylvia of his great-uncle and godfather, the Cardinal, who lived in
     Italy, and who had—or so his family liked to believe—so nearly become Pope.
Then there were his three old maiden great-aunts, who had all desired to be nuns, but who
     apparently had not had the courage to do so when it came to the point. They dwelt together in a
     remote Burgundian château, and they each spent an hour daily in their chapel praying that their
     dear nephew Paul might be rescued from the evils of play.
And as Paul de Virieu told Sylvia Bailey of all these curious old-world folk of his, Sylvia
     wondered more and more why he led the kind of existence he was leading now.
For the first time since Sylvia had come to Lacville, neither she nor Count Paul spent any
     part of that afternoon at the Casino. They were both at that happy stage of—shall we say
     friendship?—when a man and a woman cannot see too much of one another; when time is as if it
     were not; when nothing said or done can be wrong in the other's sight; when Love is still a
     soft and an invisible presence, with naught about him of the exacting tyrant he will so soon
     become.
Count Paul postponed his departure for Paris till after dinner, and not till she went up to
     dress did Sylvia sit down to write her answer to the Duchesse d'Eglemont.
For a long while she held her pen in her hand. How was she to address Paul de Virieu's
     sister? Must she call her "Dear Madame"? Should she call her "Dear Duchesse"? It was really an
     unimportant matter, but it appeared very important to Sylvia Bailey. She was exceedingly
     anxious not to commit any social solecism.
And then, while she was still hesitating, still sitting with the pen poised in her hand,
     there came a knock at the door.
The maid handed her a note; it was from Count Paul, the first letter he had ever written to
     her.
"Madame,"—so ran the note—"it occurs to me that you might like to answer my sister in French,
     and so I venture to send you the sort of letter that you might perhaps care to write. Each
     country has its own usages in these matters—that must be my excuse for my apparent
     impertinence."
And then there followed a prettily-turned little epistle which Sylvia copied, feeling perhaps
     a deeper gratitude than a far greater service would have won him from her.
A couple of hours later Sylvia and Count Paul parted at the door of the Casino. He held her
     hand longer than was usual with him when bidding her good-night; then, dropping it, he lifted
     his hat and hurried off towards the station.
Sylvia stood in the dusk and looked after him till a turn in the short road hid his hurrying
     figure from her sight.
She felt very much moved, touched to the core of her heart. She knew just as well as if he
     had told her why the Comte de Virieu had given up his evening's play to-night. He had left
     Lacville, and arranged to meet her in Paris the next day, in order that their names might not
     be coupled—as would have certainly been the case if they had travelled together into Paris the
     next morning—by M. Polperro and the good-natured, but rather vulgar Wachners.
As she turned and walked slowly through the Casino, moving as in a dream, Sylvia suddenly
     felt herself smartly tapped on the shoulder.
She turned round quickly—then she smiled. It was Madame Wachner.
"Why 'ave you not come before?" her friend exclaimed. "Madame Wolsky is making such a
     sensation! Come quick—quick!" and she hurried the unresisting Sylvia towards the Club rooms. "I
     come downstairs to see if I could find you," went on Madame Wachner breathlessly.
What could be happening? Sylvia felt the other's excitement to be contagious. As she entered
     the gambling room she saw that a large crowd was gathered round the centre Baccarat table.
"A party of young men out from Paris," explained Madame Wachner in a low tone, "are throwing
     about their money. It might have been terrible. But no, it is a great piece of good fortune for
     Madame Wolsky!"
And still Sylvia did not understand.
They walked together up to the table, and then, with amazement and a curious feeling of fear
     clutching at her heart, Sylvia Bailey saw that Anna Wolsky was holding the Bank.
It was the first time she had ever seen a lady in the Banker's seat.
A thick bundle of notes, on which were arranged symmetrical piles of gold lay in front of
     Madame Wolsky, and as was always the case when she was really excited, Anna's face had become
     very pale, and her eyes glistened feverishly.
The play, too, was much higher than usual. This was owing to the fact that at one end of the
     table there stood a little group of five young men in evening dress. They talked and laughed as
     they flung their money on the green cloth, and seemed to enjoy the fact that they were the
     centre of attraction.
"One of them," whispered Madame Wachner eagerly, "had already lost eight thousand francs when
     I went downstairs to look for you! See, they are still losing. Our friend has the devil's own
     luck to-night! I have forbidden L'Ami Fritz to play at all. Nothing can stand against her. She
     sweeps the money up every time. If Fritz likes, he can go downstairs to the lower room and
     play."
But before doing so L'Ami Fritz lingered awhile, watching Madame Wolsky's wonderful run of
     luck with an expression of painful envy and greed on his wolfish countenance.
Sylvia went round to a point where she could watch Anna's face. To a stranger Madame Wolsky
     might have appeared almost indifferent; but there had come two spots of red on her cheeks, and
     the hand with which she raked up the money trembled.
The words rang out, "Faites vos jeux, Messieurs, Mesdames." Then, "Le jeu est
      fait! Rien ne va plus!"
The luck suddenly turned against Anna. She looked up, and found Sylvia's eyes fixed on her.
     She made a slight motion, as if she wished her friend to go away.
Sylvia slipped back, and walked quietly round the table. Then she stood behind Anna, and once
     more the luck came back, and the lady banker's pile of notes and gold grew higher and
     higher....
"This is the first time a woman has held the Bank this month," Sylvia heard someone say.
And then there came an answer, "Yes, and it is by far the best Bank we have had this month—in
     fact, it's the best play we've had this season!"
At last Anna pushed away her chair and got up.
One of the young men who had lost a good deal of money came up to her and said smilingly.
"I hope, Madame, you are not going away. I propose now to take the Bank; surely, you will
     allow me to have my revenge?"
Anna Wolsky laughed.
"Certainly!" she answered. "I propose to go on playing for some time longer."
He took the Banker's seat, and the crowd dispersed to the other tables. L'Ami Fritz slipped
     away downstairs, but his wife stayed on in the Club by Sylvia's side.
Soon the table was as much surrounded as before, for Anna was again winning. She had won as
     banker, now she won as simple player, and all those about her began to "follow her luck" with
     excellent results to themselves.
The scene reminded Sylvia of that first evening at the Casino. It was only three weeks ago,
     and yet how full, how crowded the time had been!
Somehow to-night she did not feel inclined to play. To her surprise and amusement she saw
     Madame Wachner actually risk a twenty-franc piece. A moment later the stake was doubled, and
     soon the good lady had won nine gold pieces. Her face flushed with joy like a happy
     child's.
"Oh, why is not Fritz here?" she exclaimed. "How sorry I am I sent him downstairs! But, never
     mind, his old wife is making some money for once!"
At last the Banker rose from the table. He was pretty well cleared out. Smiling and bowing to
     Anna, he said, "Well, Madame, I congratulate you! You must have a very powerful mascot."
Anna shook her head gaily.
"It is pleasant to win from a millionaire," she whispered to Sylvia, "for one knows it does
     not hurt him! That young man has a share in the profit on every piece of sugar sold in France,
     and you know how fond the French are of sweet things!"
She turned from the table, followed by Sylvia and Madame Wachner.
"What will you do with all your money?" asked Madame Wachner anxiously.
"I told one of the ushers to have it all turned into notes for me," she answered
     indifferently. "As to what I shall do with it!—well, I suppose I shall have to go into Paris
     and bank some of it in a day or two. I shan't play to-morrow. I shall take a rest—I deserve a
     rest!" She looked extraordinarily excited and happy.
"Shall we drop you at the Pension Malfait?" said Madame Wachner amiably. "It is right on our
     way home, you know. I, too, have made money—" she chuckled joyously.
Madame Wachner left the two friends standing in the hall while she went to look for her
     husband in the public gambling room, and as they stood there Sylvia became conscious that they
     were being stared at with a great deal of interest and curiosity. The news of Anna Wolsky's
     extraordinary good luck had evidently spread.
"I wish I had come in a little earlier," said Sylvia presently. "I've never seen you take the
     Bank before. Surely this is the first time you have done so?"
"Yes, this is the first time I have ever been tempted to take the Bank at Lacville. But
     somehow I suddenly felt as if I should be lucky to-night. You see, I've made a good deal of
     money the last day or two, and Madame Wachner persuaded me to try my luck."
"I wish you had told me you were thinking of taking the Bank."
"I would have told you," said Anna quietly, "if I had seen you to-day. But I have been seeing
     very little of you lately, Sylvia. Why, you are more with Madame Wachner than with me!"
She did not speak unkindly, but Sylvia felt a pang of remorse. She had indeed seen very
     little of Anna Wolsky during the last few days, but that was not because she had been with
     Madame Wachner.
"I will come and see you for a little while to-night," she said impetuously, "for I am going
     to spend to-morrow in Paris—with a friend who is there just now—"
She hurried out the half-truth with a curious feeling of guilt.
"Yes, do come!" cried Anna eagerly. "You can stay with me while the carriage takes the
     Wachners on home, and then it can call for you on the way back. I should not like you to walk
     to the Villa du Lac alone at this time of night."
"Ah, but I'm not like you; I haven't won piles of money!" said Sylvia, smiling.
"No, but that makes very little difference in a place like this—"
And then Monsieur and Madame Wachner joined them. L'Ami Fritz looked quite moved out of
     himself. He seized Anna by the hand. "I congratulate you!" he said heartily. "What a splendid
     thing to go on winning like that. I wish I had been there, for I might have followed your
     luck!"
They all four walked out of the Casino. It was a very dark night.
"And what will you do with all that money?" Monsieur Wachner solicitously inquired. "It is a
     great sum to carry about, is it not?"
"It is far better to carry about one's money than to trust it to anyone but to a well-managed
     bank," exclaimed his wife, before Anna could answer the question. "As for the hotel-keepers, I
     would not trust them with one penny. What happened to a friend of ours, eh, Fritz, tell them
     that?"
They were now packed into an open carriage, and driving towards the Pension Malfait.
"I don't know what you are talking about," said her husband, crossly.
"Yes, you do! That friend of ours who was boarding in one of those small houses in the
     Condamine at Monte Carlo, and who one day won a lot of money. He gave his winnings to his
     hotel-keeper to keep for the night. Next day the man said his safe had been broken open by a
     foreign waiter who had disappeared. Our friend had no redress—none at all! Malfait may be a
     very good sort of man, but I would not give him your money—" she turned to Anna.
"No, of course not," said Madame Wolsky. "I should never think of entrusting a really large
     sum of money to a man of whom I know nothing. It is, as you say, very much better to keep one's
     money on one's person. It's the plan I've always followed. Then, if it is stolen, or if one
     loses it, one has only oneself to blame."
"It is very exciting taking the Bank," she added, after a pause. "I think I shall take the
     Bank again next time I play."
The short drive was soon over, and as Anna and Sylvia were going into the Pension Malfait,
     Madame Wachner called out, "Will you both come to supper to-morrow?"
Sylvia shook her head.
"I am going into Paris for the day," she said, "and I shall feel tired when I get back. But
     many thanks, all the same."
"Then you must come"—Madame Wachner addressed Anna Wolsky. "We also will have a rest
     from the Casino."
"Very well! I accept gratefully your kind invitation."
"Come early. Come at six, and we can 'ave a cosy chat first."
"Yes, I will!"
After giving directions that they were to be told when the carriage had come back from the
     Châlet des Muguets, the two friends went up to Anna Wolsky's bed-room.
Sylvia sat down by the open window.
"You need not light a candle, Anna," she said. "It's so pleasant just now, so quiet and cool,
     and the light would only attract those horrid midges. They seem to me the only things I have to
     find fault with in Lacville!"
Anna Wolsky came and sat down in the darkness close to the younger woman.
"Sylvia," she said, "dear little Sylvia! Sometimes I feel uneasy at having brought you to
     Lacville." She spoke in a thoughtful and very serious tone.
"Indeed, you need feel nothing of the kind."
Sylvia Bailey put out her hand and took the other woman's hand in her own. She knew in her
     heart what Anna meant, but she wilfully pretended to misunderstand her.
"You need never think that I run the slightest risk of becoming a gambler," she went on, a
     little breathlessly. "I was looking at my account-book to-day, and I find that since I have
     been here I have lost seventy francs. Two days ago I had won a hundred and ten francs. So you
     see it is not a very serious matter, is it? Just think of all the fun I've had! It's well worth
     the money I've lost. Besides, I shall probably win it all back—"
"I was not thinking of the money," said Anna Wolsky slowly.
Sylvia made a restless movement, and took her hand out of Anna's affectionate clasp.
"I'm afraid that you are becoming very fond of the Comte de Virieu," went on Anna, in a low
     voice but very deliberately. "You must forgive me, Sylvia, but I am older than you are. Have
     you thought of the consequences of this friendship of yours? I confess that at the beginning I
     credited that man with the worst of motives, but now I feel afraid that he is in love—in fact I
     feel sure that he is madly in love with you. Do you know that he never takes his eyes off you
     in the Club? Often he forgets to pick up his winnings...."
Sylvia's heart began to beat. She wondered if Anna was indeed telling the truth. She almost
     bent forward and kissed her friend in her gratitude—but all she said was, and that
     defiantly,
"You can believe me when I say that he has never said a word of love to me. He has never even
     flirted with me. I give you my word that that is so!"
"Ah, but it is just that fact that makes me believe that he cares. Flirtation is an English
     art, not a French art, my dear Sylvia. A Frenchman either loves—and when he loves he adores on
     his knees—or else he has no use, no use at all, for what English people mean by flirtation—the
     make-believe of love! I should feel much more at ease if the Count had insulted you—"
"Anna!"
"Yes, indeed! I am quite serious. I fear he loves you."
And as Sylvia gave a long, involuntary, happy sigh, Anna went on: "Of course, I do not regard
     him with trust or with liking. How could I? On the other hand, I do not go as far as the
     Wachners; they, it is quite clear, evidently know something very much to the Count's
     discredit."
"I don't believe they do!" cried Sylvia, hotly. "It is mere prejudice on their part! He does
     not like them, and they know it. He thinks them vulgar sort of people, and he suspects that
     Monsieur Wachner is German—that is quite enough for him."
"But, after all, it does not really matter what the Wachners think of the Comte de Virieu, or
     what he thinks of them," said Anna. "What matters is what you think of him, and what
      he thinks of you."
Sylvia was glad that the darkness hid her deep, burning blushes from Anna Wolsky.
"You do not realise," said the Polish lady, gravely, "what your life would be if you were
     married to a man whose only interest in life is play. Mind you, I do not say that a gambler
     does not make a kind husband. We have an example"—she smiled a little—"in this Monsieur
     Wachner. He is certainly very fond of his wife, and she is very fond of him. But would you like
     your husband always to prefer his vice to you?"
Sylvia made no answer.
"But why am I talking like that?" Anna Wolsky started up suddenly. "It is absurd of me to
     think it possible that you would dream of marrying the Comte de Virieu! No, no, my dear child,
     this poor Frenchman is one of those men who, even if personally charming, no wise woman would
     think of marrying. He is absolutely ruined. I do not suppose he has a penny left of his own in
     the world. He would not have the money to buy you a wedding ring. You would have to provide
     even that! It would be madness—absolute madness!"
"I do not think," said Sylvia, in a low tone, "that there is the slightest likelihood of my
     ever marrying the Comte de Virieu. You forget that I have known him only a short time, and that
     he has never said a word of love to me. As you say, all he cares about is play."
"Surely you must be as well aware as I am that lately he has played a great deal less," said
     Anna, "and the time that he would have spent at the Club—well, you and I know very well where
     he has spent the time, Sylvia. He has spent it with you."
"And isn't that a good thing?" asked Sylvia, eagerly. "Isn't it far better that he should
     spend his time talking to me about ordinary things than in the Casino? Let me assure you again,
     and most solemnly, Anna, that he never makes love to me—"
"Of course it is a good thing for him that he plays less"—Anna spoke impatiently—"but is it
     best for you? That is what I ask myself. You have not looked well lately, Sylvia. You have
     looked very sad sometimes. Oh, do not be afraid, you are quite as pretty as ever you were!"
The tears were running down Sylvia's face. She felt that she ought to be very angry with her
     friend for speaking thus plainly to her, and yet she could not be angry. Anna spoke so
     tenderly, so kindly, so delicately.
"Shall we go away from Lacville?" asked Madame Wolsky, suddenly. "There are a hundred places
     where you and I could go together. Let us leave Lacville! I am sure you feel just as I do—I am
     sure you realise that the Comte de Virieu would never make you happy."
Sylvia shook her head.
"I do not want to go away," she whispered.
And then Madame Wolsky uttered a short exclamation.
"Ah!" she cried, "I understand. He is the friend you are to meet to-morrow—that is why you
     are going into Paris!"
Sylvia remained silent.
"I understand it all now," went on Anna. "That is the reason why he was not there to-night.
     He has gone into Paris so as not to compromise you at Lacville. That is the sort of gallantry
     that means so little! As if Lacville matters—but tell me this, Sylvia? Has he ever spoken to
     you as if he desired to introduce his family to you? That is the test, remember—that is the
     test of a Frenchman's regard for a woman."
There came a knock at the door. "The carriage for Madame has arrived."
They went downstairs, Sylvia having left her friend's last question unanswered.
Madame Wolsky, though generally so undemonstrative, took Sylvia in her arms and kissed
     her.
"God bless you, my dear little friend!" she whispered, "and forgive all I have said to you
     to-night! Still, think the matter over. I have lived a great deal of my life in this country. I
     am almost a Frenchwoman. It is no use marrying a Frenchman unless his family marry you too—and
     I understand that the Comte de Virieu's family have cast him off."
Sylvia got into the carriage and looked back, her eyes blinded with tears.
Anna Wolsky stood in the doorway of the Pension, her tall, thin figure in sharp silhouette
     against the lighted hall.
"We will meet the day after to-morrow, is that not so?" she cried out.
And Sylvia nodded. As she drove away, she told herself that whatever happened she would
     always remain faithful to her affection for Anna Wolsky.
The next morning found Paul de Virieu walking up and down platform No. 9 of the Gare du Nord,
     waiting for Mrs. Bailey's train, which was due to arrive from Lacville at eleven o'clock.
Though he looked as if he hadn't a care in the world save the pleasant care of enjoying the
     present and looking forward to the future, life was very grey just now to the young
     Frenchman.
To a Parisian, Paris in hot weather is a depressing place, even under the pleasantest of
     circumstances, and the Count felt an alien and an outcast in the city where he had spent much
     of his careless and happy youth.
His sister, the Duchesse d'Eglemont, who had journeyed all the way from Brittany to see him
     for two or three days, had received him with that touch of painful affection which the kindly
     and the prosperous so often bestow on those whom they feel to be at once beloved and
     prodigal.
When with his dear Marie-Anne, Paul de Virieu always felt as though he had been condemned to
     be guillotined, and as if she were doing everything to make his last days on earth as pleasant
     as possible.
When he had proposed that his sister should ask his new friend, this English widow he had met
     at Lacville, to luncheon—nay more, when he had asked Marie-Anne to lend Mrs. Bailey a riding
     habit, and to arrange that one of the Duc's horses should come over every morning in order that
     he and Mrs. Bailey might ride together—the kind Duchesse had at once assented, almost too
     eagerly, to his requests. And she had asked her brother no tiresome, indiscreet questions as to
     his relations with the young Englishwoman,—whether, for instance, he was really fond of Sylvia,
     whether it was conceivably possible that he was thinking of marrying her?
And, truth to tell, Paul de Virieu would have found it very difficult to give an honest
     answer to the question. He was in a strange, debatable state of mind about Sylvia—beautiful,
     simple, unsophisticated Sylvia Bailey.
He told himself, and that very often, that the young Englishwoman, with her absurd, touching
     lack of worldly knowledge, had no business to be living in such a place as Lacville, wasting
     her money at the Baccarat tables, and knowing such queer people as were—well, yes, even Anna
     Wolsky was queer—Madame Wolsky and the Wachners!
But if Sylvia Bailey had no business to be at Lacville, he, Paul de Virieu, had no business
     to be flirting with her as he was doing—for though Sylvia was honestly unaware of the fact, the
     Count was carrying on what he well knew to be a very agreeable flirtation with the lady he
     called in his own mind his "petite amie Anglaise," and very much he was enjoying the
     experience—when his conscience allowed him to enjoy it.
Till the last few weeks Paul de Virieu had supposed himself to have come to that time of life
     when a man can no longer feel the delicious tremors of love. Now no man, least of all a
     Frenchman, likes to feel that this time has come, and it was inexpressibly delightful to him to
     know that he had been mistaken—that he could still enjoy the most absorbing and enchanting
     sensation vouchsafed to poor humanity.
He was in love! In love for the first time for many years, and with a sweet, happy-natured
     woman, who became more intimately dear to him every moment that went by. Indeed, he knew that
     the real reason why he had felt so depressed last night and even this morning was because he
     was parted from Sylvia.
But where was it all to end? True, he had told Mrs. Bailey the truth about himself very early
     in their acquaintance—in fact, amazingly soon, and he had been prompted to do so by a feeling
     which defied analysis.
But still, did Sylvia, even now, realise what that truth was? Did she in the least understand
     what it meant for a man to be bound and gagged, as he was bound and gagged, lashed to the
     chariot of the Goddess of Chance? No, of course she did not realise it—how could such a woman
     as was Sylvia Bailey possibly do so?
Walking up and down the long platform, chewing the cud of bitter reflection, Paul de Virieu
     told himself that the part of an honest man, to say nothing of that of an honourable gentleman,
     would be to leave Lacville before matters had gone any further between them. Yes, that was what
     he was bound to do by every code of honour.
And then, just as he had taken the heroic resolution of going back to Brittany with his
     sister, as Marie-Anne had begged him to do only that morning, the Lacville train steamed into
     the station—and with the sight of Sylvia's lovely face all his good resolutions flew to the
     winds.
She stepped down from the high railway carriage, and looked round her with a rather
     bewildered air, for a crowd of people were surging round her, and she had not yet caught sight
     of Count Paul.
Wearing a pinkish mauve cotton gown and a large black tulle hat, Sylvia looked enchantingly
     pretty. And if the Count's critical French eyes objected to the alliance of a cotton gown and
     tulle hat, and to the wearing of a string of large pearls in the morning, he was in the state
     of mind when a man of fastidious taste forgives even a lack of taste in the woman to whom he is
     acting as guide, philosopher, and friend.
He told himself that Sylvia Bailey could not be left alone in a place like Lacville, and that
     it was his positive duty to stay on there and look after her....
Suddenly their eyes met. Sylvia blushed—Heavens! how adorable she looked when there came that
     vivid rose-red blush over her rounded cheeks. And she was adorable in a simple, unsophisticated
     way, which appealed to Paul de Virieu as nothing in woman had ever appealed to him before.
He could not help enjoying the thought of how surprised his sister would be. Marie-Anne had
     doubtless pictured Mrs. Bailey as belonging to the rather hard, self-assertive type of young
     Englishwoman of whom Paris sees a great deal. But Sylvia looked girlishly simple, timid, and
     confiding.
As he greeted her, Paul de Virieu's manner was serious, almost solemn. But none the less,
     while they walked side by side in a quiet, leisurely fashion through the great grey station,
     Sylvia felt as if she had indeed passed through the shining portals of fairyland.
In the covered courtyard stood the Duchesse's carriage. Count Paul motioned the footman aside
     and stood bareheaded while Sylvia took her place in the victoria. As he sat down by her side he
     suddenly observed, "My brother-in-law does not like motor-cars," and Sylvia felt secret,
     shame-faced gratitude to the Duc d'Eglemont, for, thanks to this prejudice of his, the moments
     now being spent by her alone with Count Paul were trebled.
As the carriage drove with swift, gondola-like motion through the hot streets, Sylvia felt
     more than ever as if she were in a new, enchanted country—that dear country called Romance,
     and, as if to prolong the illusion, the Count began to talk what seemed to her the language of
     that country.
"Every Frenchman," he exclaimed, abruptly, "is in love with love, and when you hear—as you
     may do sometimes, Madame—that a Frenchman is rarely in love with his own wife, pray answer that
     this is quite untrue! For it often happens that in his wife a Frenchman discovers the love he
     has sought elsewhere in vain."
He looked straight before him as he added: "As for marriage—well, marriage is in my country
     regarded as a very serious matter indeed! No Frenchman goes into marriage as light-heartedly as
     does the average Englishman, and as have done, for instance, so many of my own English
     schoolfellows. No, to a Frenchman his marriage means everything or nothing, and if he loved a
     woman it would appear to him a dastardly action to ask her to share his life if he did not
     believe that life to be what would be likely to satisfy her, to bring her honour and
     happiness."
Sylvia turned to him, and, rather marvelling at her own temerity, she asked a fateful
     question:
"But would love ever make the kind of Frenchman you describe give up a way of life that was
     likely to make his wife unhappy?"
Count Paul looked straight into the blue eyes which told him so much more than their owner
     knew they told.
"Yes! He might easily give up that life for the sake of a beloved woman. But would he remain
     always faithful in his renunciation? That is the question which none, least of all himself, can
     answer!"
The victoria was now crossing one of the bridges which are, perhaps, the noblest possession
     of outdoor Paris.
Count Paul changed the subject. He had seen with mingled pain and joy how much his last
     honest words had troubled her.
"My brother-in-law has never cared to move west, as so many of his friends have done," he
     observed. "He prefers to remain in the old family house that was built by his great-grandfather
     before the French Revolution."
Soon they were bowling along a quiet, sunny street, edged with high walls overhung with
     trees. The street bore the name of Babylon.
And indeed there was something almost Babylonian, something very splendid in the vast
     courtyard which formed the centre of what appeared, to Sylvia's fascinated eyes, a grey stone
     palace. The long rows of high, narrow windows which now encompassed her were all closed, but
     with the clatter of the horses' hoofs on the huge paving-stones the great house stirred into
     life.
The carriage drew up. Count Paul jumped out and gave Sylvia his hand. Huge iron doors, that
     looked as if they could shut out an invading army, were flung open, and after a moment's pause,
     Paul de Virieu led Sylvia Bailey across the threshold of the historic Hôtel d'Eglemont.
She had never seen, she had never imagined, such pomp, such solemn state, as that which
     greeted her, and there came across her a childish wish that Anna Wolsky and the Wachners could
     witness the scene—the hall hung with tapestries given to an ancestor of the Duc d'Eglemont by
     Louis the Fourteenth, the line of powdered footmen, and the solemn major-domo who ushered them
     up the wide staircase, at the head of which there stood a slender, white-clad young woman, with
     a sweet, eager face.
This was the first time Sylvia Bailey had met a duchess, and she was perhaps a little
     surprised to see how very unpretentious a duchess could be!
Marie-Anne d'Eglemont spoke in a low, almost timid voice, her English being far less good
     than her brother's, and yet how truly kind and highly-bred she at once showed herself, putting
     Sylvia at her ease, and appearing to think there was nothing at all unusual in Mrs. Bailey's
     friendship with Paul de Virieu!
And then, after they had lunched in an octagon room of which each panel had been painted by
     Van Loo, and which opened on a garden where the green glades and high trees looked as if they
     must be far from a great city, there suddenly glided in a tiny old lady, dressed in a sweeping
     black gown and little frilled lace cap.
Count Paul bowing low before her, kissed her waxen-looking right hand.
"My dear godmother, let me present to you Mrs. Bailey," and Sylvia felt herself being
     closely, rather pitilessly, inspected by shrewd though not unkindly eyes—eyes sunken, dimmed by
     age, yet seeing more, perhaps, than younger eyes would have seen.
The old Marquise beckoned to Count Paul, and together they slowly walked through into the
     garden and paced away down a shaded alley. For the first time Sylvia and Marie-Anne d'Eglemont
     were alone together.
"I wish to thank you for your kindness to my poor Paul," the Duchesse spoke in a low,
     hesitating voice. "You have so much influence over him, Madame."
Sylvia shook her head.
"Ah! But yes, you have!" She looked imploringly at Sylvia. "You know what I mean? You know
     what I would ask you to do? My husband could give Paul work in the country, work he would love,
     for he adores horses, if only he could be rescued from this terrible infatuation, this passion
     for play."
She stopped abruptly, for the Count and his little, fairy-like godmother had turned round,
     and were now coming towards them.
Sylvia rose instinctively to her feet, for the tiny Marquise was very imposing.
"Sit down, Madame," she said imperiously, and Sylvia meekly obeyed.
The old lady fixed her eyes with an appraising gaze on her godson's English friend.
"Permit me to embrace you," she exclaimed suddenly. "You are a very pretty creature! And
     though no doubt young lips often tell you this, the compliments of the old have the merit of
     being quite sincere!"
She bent down, and Sylvia, to her confusion and surprise, felt her cheeks lightly kissed by
     the withered lips of Paul de Virieu's godmother.
"Madame Bailey's rouge is natural; it does not come off!" the old lady exclaimed, and a smile
     crept over her parchment-coloured face. "Not but what a great deal of nonsense is talked about
     the usage of rouge, my dear children! There is no harm in supplementing the niggardly gifts of
     nature. You, for instance, Marie-Anne, would look all the better for a little rouge!" She spoke
     in a high, quavering voice.
The Duchesse smiled. Her brother had always been the old Marquise's favourite.
"But I should feel so ashamed if it came off," she said lightly; "if, for instance, I felt
     one of my cheeks growing pale while the other remained bright red?"
"That would never happen if you used what I have often told you is the only rouge a lady
     should use, that is, the sap of the geranium blossom—that gives an absolutely natural tint to
     the skin, and my own dear mother always used it. You remember how Louis XVIII. complimented her
     on her beautiful complexion at the first Royal ball held after the Restoration? Well, the
     Sovereign's gracious words were entirely owing to the geranium blossom!"
The day after her memorable expedition to Paris opened pleasantly for Sylvia Bailey, though
     it was odd how dull and lifeless the Villa du Lac seemed to be without Count Paul.
But he would be back to-morrow, and in the morning of the next day they were to begin riding
     together.
Again and again she went over in retrospect every moment of the two hours she had spent in
     that great house in the Faubourg St. Germain.
How kind these two ladies had been to her, Paul's gentle sister and his stately little
     fairy-like godmother! But the Duchesse's manner had been very formal, almost solemn; and as for
     the other—Sylvia could still feel the dim, yet terribly searching, eyes fixed on her face, and
     she wondered nervously what sort of effect she had produced on the old Marquise.
Meanwhile, she felt that now was the time to see something of Anna Wolsky. The long afternoon
     and evening stretching before her seemed likely to be very dull, and so she wrote a little note
     and asked Anna if she would care for a long expedition in the Forest of Montmorency. It was the
     sort of thing Anna always said bored her, but as she was not going to the Casino a drive would
     surely be better than doing nothing.
And now Sylvia, sitting idly by her bed-room window, was awaiting Anna's answer to her note.
     She had sent it, just before she went down to luncheon, by a commissionaire, to the Pension
     Malfait, and the answer ought to have come ere now.
After their drive she and Anna might call on the Wachners and offer to take them to the
     Casino; and with the thought of the Wachners there came over Sylvia a regret that the Comte de
     Virieu was so fastidious. He seemed to detest the Wachners! When he met them at the Casino, the
     most he would do was to incline his head coldly towards them. Who could wonder that Madame
     Wachner spoke so disagreeably of him?
Sylvia Bailey's nature was very loyal, and now she reminded herself that this couple, for
     whom Count Paul seemed to have an instinctive dislike, were good-natured and kindly. She must
     ever remember gratefully how helpful Madame Wachner had been during the first few days she and
     Anna had been at Lacville, in showing them the little ways about the place, and in explaining
     to them all sorts of things about the Casino.
And how kindly the Wachners had pressed Anna yesterday to have supper with them during
     Sylvia's absence in Paris!
There came a knock at the door, and Sylvia jumped up from her chair. No doubt this was Anna
     herself in response to the note.
"Come in," she cried out, in English.
There was a pause, and another knock. Then it was not Anna?
"Entrez!"
The commissionaire by whom Sylvia had sent her note to Madame Wolsky walked into the room. To
     her great surprise he handed her back her own letter to her friend. The envelope had been
     opened, and together with her letter was a sheet of common notepaper, across which was
     scrawled, in pencil, the words, "Madame Wolsky est partie."
Sylvia looked up. "Partie?" The word puzzled her. Surely it should have been
      "Sortie." Perhaps Anna had gone to Paris for the day to bank her large winnings.
     "Then the lady was out?" she said to the man.
"The lady has left the Pension Malfait," he said, briefly. "She has gone away."
"There must be some mistake!" Sylvia exclaimed, in French. "My friend would never have left
     Lacville without telling me."
The commissionaire went on: "But I have brought back a motor-cab as Madame directed me to
     do."
She paid him, and went downstairs hurriedly. What an extraordinary mistake! It was out of the
     question that Anna should have left Lacville without telling her; but as the motor was there
     she might as well drive to the Pension Malfait and find out the meaning of the curt message,
     and also why her own letter to Anna had been opened.
If Anna had gone into Paris for the day, the only thing to do was to go for a drive alone.
     The prospect was not exhilarating, but it would be better than staying indoors, or even in the
     garden by herself, all afternoon.
Sylvia felt rather troubled and uncomfortable as she got into the open motor. Somehow she had
     counted on seeing Anna to-day. She remembered her friend's last words to her. They had been
     kind, tender words, and though Anna did not approve of Sylvia's friendship for Paul de Virieu,
     she had spoken in a very understanding, sympathetic way, almost as a loving mother might have
     spoken.
It was odd of Anna not to have left word she was going to Paris for the day. In any case, the
     Wachners would know when Anna would be back. It was with them that she had had supper yesterday
     evening—.
While these thoughts were passing disconnectedly through Sylvia's mind, she suddenly saw the
     substantial figure of Madame Wachner walking slowly along the sanded path by the side of the
     road.
"Madame Wachner! Madame Wachner!" she cried out eagerly, and the car drew up with a jerk.
That citizeness of the world, as she had called herself, stepped down from the kerb. She
     looked hot and tired. It was a most unusual time for Madame Wachner to be out walking, and by
     herself, in Lacville.
But Sylvia was thinking too much about Anna Wolsky to trouble about anything else.
"Have you heard that Anna Wolsky is away for the day?" she exclaimed. "I have received such a
     mysterious message from the Pension Malfait! Do come with me there and find out where she has
     gone and when she is coming back. Did she say anything about going into Paris when she had
     supper with you last night?"
With a smile and many voluble thanks Madame Wachner climbed up into the open car, and sat
     back with a sigh of satisfaction.
She was very stout, though still so vigorous, and her shrewd, determined face now turned
     smilingly to the pretty, anxious-eyed Englishwoman. But she waited a few moments before
     answering Sylvia's eager questions. Then,
"I cannot tell you," she said slowly and in French, "what has happened to Madame Wolsky—"
"What has happened to her!" cried Sylvia. "What do you mean, Madame Wachner?"
"Oh, of course, nothing 'as 'appened." Madame Wachner dropped soothingly into English. "All I
     mean is that Madame Wolsky did not come to us yesterday evening. We stayed in on purpose, but,
     as English people say so funnily, she never turn up!"
"But she was coming to tea as well as to supper!"
"Yes, we waited for 'er a long time, and I 'ad got such a beautiful little supper! But, alas!
     she did not come—no, not at all."
"How odd of her! Perhaps she got a telegram which contained bad news—"
"Yes," said Madame Wachner eagerly, "no doubt. For this morning when I go to the Pension
     Malfait, I 'ear that she 'as gone away! It was for that I was 'urrying to the Villa du Lac to
     see if you knew anything, dear friend."
"Gone away?" repeated Sylvia, bewildered. "But it is inconceivable that Anna could have left
     Lacville without telling me—or, for the matter of that, without telling you, too—"
"She 'as taken what you in England call 'French leave,'" said Madame Wachner drily. "It was
     not very considerate of 'er. She might 'ave sent us word last night. We would not then 'ave
     waited to 'ave our nice supper."
"She can't have gone away without telling me," repeated Sylvia. She was staring straight into
     her companion's red face: Madame Wachner still looked very hot and breathless. "I am sure she
     would never have done such a thing. Why should she?"
The older woman shrugged her shoulders.
"I expect she will come back soon," she said consolingly. "She 'as left her luggage at the
     Pension Malfait, and that, after all, does not look as if she 'as gone for evare!"
"Left her luggage?" cried Sylvia, in a relieved tone. "Why, then, of course, she is coming
     back! I expect she has gone to Paris for a night in order to see friends passing through. How
     could the Pension Malfait people think she had gone—I mean for good? You know, Madame
     Wachner"—she lowered her voice, for she did not wish the driver to hear what she was about to
     say—"you know that Anna won a very large sum of money two nights ago."
Sylvia Bailey was aware that people had been robbed and roughly handled, even in idyllic
     Lacville, when leaving the Casino after an especial stroke of luck at the tables.
"I do hope nothing has happened to her!"
"'Appened to 'er? What do you mean?" Madame Wachner spoke quite crossly. "Who ever thought of
     such a thing!" And she fanned herself vigorously with a paper fan she held in her left hand.
     "As to her winnings—yes, she won a lot of money the night she took the bank. But, remember that
     she 'as 'ad plenty of time yesterday to lose it all again—ah, yes!"
"But she meant to give up play till Monday," said Sylvia, eagerly. "I feel sure she never
     went inside the Casino yesterday."
"Oh, but she did. My 'usband saw her there."
"At what time?" asked Sylvia, eagerly.
"Let me see—"
"Of course, it must have been early, as you were back waiting for her late in the
     afternoon."
"Yes, it must have been early. And once in the Casino!—well, dear friend, you know as well as
     I do that with Madame Wolsky the money flies! Still, let us suppose she did not lose 'er money
     yesterday. In that case surely Madame Wolsky would 'ave done well to leave Lacville with 'er
     gains in 'er pocket-book."
Madame Wachner was leaning back in the car, a ruminating smile on her broad, good-tempered
     face.
She was thoroughly enjoying the rush through the air. It was very hot, and she disliked
     walking. Her morose husband very seldom allowed her to take a cab. He generally forced her to
     walk to the Casino and back.
Something of a philosopher was Madame Wachner, always accepting with eager, out-stretched
     hands that with which the gods provided her.
And all at once pretty Sylvia Bailey, though unobservant as happy, prosperous youth so often
     is, conceived the impression that her companion did not at all wish to discuss Anna's sudden
     departure. Madame Wachner had evidently been very much annoyed by Anna's lack of civility, and
     surely the least Anna could have done would have been to send a message saying that it was
     impossible for her to come to supper at the Châlet des Muguets!
"I am quite sure Anna did not mean to be rude, dear Madame Wachner," said Sylvia, earnestly.
     "You know she may have sent you a letter or a message which miscarried. They are rather
     careless people at the Pension Malfait."
"Yes, of course, that is always possible," said the other rather coldly.
And then, as they came within sight of the Pension Malfait, Madame Wachner suddenly placed
     her large, powerful, bare hand on Sylvia's small gloved one.
"Look 'ere, my dear," she said, familiarly, "do not worry about Madame Wolsky. Believe me,
     she is not worth it."
Sylvia looked at her amazed, and then Madame Wachner broke into French: "She thought of
     nothing but play—that is the truth! Play, play, play! Other times she was half asleep!"
She waited a moment, then slowly, and in English, she said, "I believe in my 'eart that she
     'as gone off to Aix. The play 'ere was not big enough for 'er. And remember that you 'ave good
     friends still left in Lacville. I do not only speak of me and of my 'usband, but also of
     another one."
She laughed, if good-naturedly, then a little maliciously.
But Sylvia gave no answering smile. She told herself that Madame Wachner, though kindly, was
     certainly rather vulgar, not to say coarse. And her words about Madame Wolsky were really
     unkind. Anna was not such a gambler as was Fritz Wachner.
They were now at the gate of the boarding house.
"We will, at any rate, go in and find out when Anna left, and if she said where she was
     going," said Sylvia.
"If you do not mind," observed Madame Wachner, "I will remain out here, in the car. They have
     already seen me this morning at the Pension Malfait. They must be quite tired of seeing
     me."
Sylvia felt rather disappointed. She would have liked the support of Madame Wachner's
     cheerful presence when making her inquiries, for she was aware that the proprietors of Anna's
     pension—M. and Madame Malfait—had been very much annoyed that she, Sylvia, had not joined her
     friend there.
Madame Malfait was sitting in her usual place—that is, in a little glass cage in the hall—and
     when she saw Mrs. Bailey coming towards her, a look of impatience, almost of dislike, crossed
     her thin, shrewd face.
"Bon jour, Madame!" she said curtly. "I suppose you also have come to ask me about Madame
     Wolsky? But I think you must have heard all there is to hear from the lady whom I see out there
     in the car. I can tell you nothing more than I have already told her. Madame Wolsky has treated
     us with great want of consideration. She did not come home last evening. Poor Malfait waited up
     all night, wondering what could be the matter. And then, this morning, we found a letter in her
     room saying she had gone away!"
"A letter in her room?" exclaimed Sylvia. "Madame Wachner did not tell me that my friend had
     left a letter—"
But Madame Malfait went on angrily:
"Madame Wolsky need not have troubled to write! A word of explanation would have been better,
     and would have prevented my husband sitting up till five o'clock this morning. We quite feared
     something must have happened to her. But we have a great dislike to any affair with the police,
     and so we thought we would wait before telling them of her disappearance, and it is indeed
     fortunate that we did so!"
"Will you kindly show me the letter she left for you?" said Sylvia.
Without speaking, Madame Malfait bent down over her table, and then held out a piece of
     notepaper on which were written the words:
Madame Malfait,—
Being unexpectedly obliged to leave Lacville, I enclose herewith 200 francs. Please pay what
      is owing to you out of it, and distribute the rest among the servants. I will send you word
      where to forward my luggage in a day or two.
Sylvia stared reflectively at the open letter.
Anna had not even signed her name. The few lines were very clear, written in a large, decided
     handwriting, considerably larger, or so it seemed to Sylvia, than what she had thought Anna's
     ordinary hand to be. But then the Englishwoman had not had the opportunity of seeing much of
     her Polish friend's caligraphy.
Before she had quite finished reading the mysterious letter over a second time, Madame
     Malfait took it out of her hand.
But Sylvia Bailey was entirely unused to being snubbed—pretty young women provided with
     plenty of money seldom are snubbed—and so she did not turn away and leave the hall, as Madame
     Malfait hoped she would do.
"What a strange thing!" she observed, in a troubled tone. "How extraordinary it is that my
     friend should have gone away like this, leaving her luggage behind her! What can possibly have
     made her want to leave Lacville in such a hurry? She was actually engaged to have dinner with
     our friends, Monsieur and Madame Wachner. Did she not send them any sort of message, Madame
     Malfait? I wish you would try and remember what she said when she went out."
The Frenchwoman looked at her with a curious stare.
"If you ask me to tell you the truth, Madame," she replied, rather insolently, "I have no
     doubt at all that your friend went to the Casino yesterday and lost a great deal of money—that
     she became, in fact, décavée."
Then, feeling ashamed, both of her rudeness and of her frankness, she added:
"But Madame Wolsky is a very honest lady, that I will say for her. You see, she left enough
     money to pay for everything, as well as to provide my servants with handsome gratuities. That
     is more than the last person who left the Pension Malfait in a hurry troubled to do!"
"But is it not extraordinary that she left her luggage, and that she did not even tell you
     where she was going?" repeated Sylvia in a worried, dissatisfied tone.
"Pardon me, Madame, that is not strange at all! Madame Wolsky probably went off to Paris
     without knowing exactly where she meant to stay, and no one wants to take luggage with them
     when they are looking round for an hotel. I am expecting at any moment to receive a telegram
     telling me where to send the luggage. You, Madame, if you permit me to say so, have not had my
     experience—my experience, I mean, in the matter of ladies who play at the Lacville Casino."
There was still a tone of covert insolence in her voice, and she went on, "True, Madame
     Wolsky has not behaved as badly as she might have done. Still, you must admit that it is rather
     inconsiderate of her, after engaging the room for the whole of the month of August, to go off
     like this!"
Madame Malfait felt thoroughly incensed, and did not trouble to conceal the fact. But as Mrs.
     Bailey at last began walking towards the front door, the landlady of the pension hurried after
     her.
"Madame will not say too much about her friend's departure, will she?" she said more
     graciously. "I do not want any embarrassments with the police. Everything is quite en
      règle, is it not? After all, Madame Wolsky had a right to go away without telling anyone
     of her plans, had she not, Madame?"
Sylvia turned round. "Certainly, she had an entire right to do so," she answered coldly.
     "But, still, I should be much obliged if you will send me word when you receive the telegram
     you are expecting her to send you about the luggage."
"Well?" cried Madame Wachner eagerly, as Sylvia silently got into the motor again. "Have you
     learnt anything? Have they not had news of our friend?"
"They have heard nothing since they found that odd letter of hers," said Sylvia. "You never
     told me about the letter, Madame Wachner?"
"Ah, that letter! I saw it, too. But it said nothing, absolutely nothing!" exclaimed Madame
     Wachner.
And Sylvia suddenly realised that in truth Anna's letter did say nothing.
"I should have thought they would have had a telegram to-day about the luggage."
"So would I," said Sylvia. And then musingly, "I should never, never have expected Anna
     Wolsky to go off like that. So—so mysteriously—"
"Well, there, I quite disagree with you! It is just what I should have expected her to do!"
     exclaimed Madame Wachner. "She told me of that visit you both made to the soothsayer. Perhaps
     she made up in her mind to follow that person's advice. Our friend was always a little
     mysterious, was she not? Did she ever talk to you of her family, of her friends?" She looked
     inquisitively at her companion.
"Yes—no," said Sylvia, hesitating. "I do not think poor Anna has many relations. You see, she
     is a widow. I believe her father and mother are dead."
"Ah, that is very sad! Then you do not know of anyone to write to about her?"
"I?" said Sylvia. "No, of course I don't know of anyone to write to. How could I? I haven't
     known her very long, you know, Madame Wachner. But we became friends almost at once."
The motor was still stationary. The driver turned round for orders. Sylvia roused
     herself.
"Can I drive you back to the Châlet des Muguets?" she asked. "Somehow I don't feel inclined
     to take a drive in the forest now."
"If you do not mind," said Madame Wachner, "I should prefer to be driven to the station, for
     l'Ami Fritz had to go to Paris." She laughed ruefully. "To fetch money, as usual! His system
     did not work at all well yesterday—poor Fritz!"
"How horrid!" said Sylvia. "It must be very disappointing to your husband when his system
     goes wrong."
"Yes, very," answered the wife drily. "But when one system fails—well, then he at once sets
     himself to inventing another! I lose a great deal more in the lower room playing with francs
     than Fritz does at baccarat playing with gold. You see, a system has this good about it—the
     player generally comes out even at the end of each month."
"Does he, indeed?"
But Sylvia was not attending to what the other was saying. She was still absorbed in the
     thought of her friend, and of the mystery of her friend's sudden departure from Lacville.
When at last they reached the station, Madame Wachner turned and grasped Sylvia by the
     hand.
"We must not let you become low-spirited!" she exclaimed. "It is a great pity your kind
     friend has gone away. But doubtless you will soon be going away, too?"
And, as Sylvia made no answer, "Perhaps it would be well not to say too much concerning
     Madame Wolsky having left like this. She might come back any moment, and then she would not
     like it if there had been a fuss made about it! If I were you I would tell nobody—I repeat
     emphatically nobody."
Madame Wachner stared significantly at Sylvia. "You do not know what the police of Lacville
     are like, my dear friend. They are very unpleasant people. As you were Anna's only friend in
     the place, they might give you considerable trouble. They would ask you where to look for her,
     and they would torment you incessantly. If I were you I would say as little as possible."
Madame Wachner spoke very quickly, almost breathlessly, and Sylvia felt vaguely
     uncomfortable. There was, of course, only one person to whom she was likely to mention the
     fact, and that was Paul de Virieu.
Was it possible that Madame Wachner wished to warn her against telling him of a fact which he
     was sure to discover for himself in the course of a day or two?
As Sylvia drove away alone from the station, she felt exceedingly troubled and unhappy.
It was all very well for Madame Wachner to take the matter of Anna Wolsky's disappearance
     from Lacville so philosophically. The Wachners' acquaintance with Madame Wolsky had been really
     very slight, and they naturally knew nothing of the Polish woman's inner nature and
     temperament.
Sylvia told herself that Anna must have been in great trouble, and that something very
     serious must have happened to her, before she could have gone away like this, without saying
     anything about it.
If poor Anna had changed her mind, and gone to the Casino the day before, she might, of
     course, have lost all her winnings and more. Sylvia reminded herself that it stood to reason
     that if one could make hundreds of pounds in an hour or two, then one might equally lose
     hundreds of pounds in the same time. But somehow she could hardly believe that her friend had
     been so foolish.
Still, how else to account for Anna's disappearance, her sudden exit from Lacville? Anna
     Wolsky was a proud woman, and Sylvia suspected that if she had come unexpectedly to the end of
     her resources, she would have preferred to go away rather than confide her trouble to a new
     friend.
Tears slowly filled Sylvia Bailey's blue eyes. She felt deeply hurt by Anna's strange
     conduct.
Madame Wachner's warning as to saying as little as possible of the other's departure from
     Lacville had made very little impression on Sylvia, yet it so far affected her that, instead of
     telling Monsieur Polperro of the fact the moment she was back at the Villa du Lac, she went
     straight up to her own room. But when there she found that she could settle down to
     nothing—neither to a book nor to letters.
Since her husband's death Sylvia Bailey's social circle had become much larger, and there
     were a number of people who enjoyed inviting and meeting the pretty, wealthy young widow. But
     just now all these friends of hers in far-away England seemed quite unreal and, above all,
     quite uninteresting.
Sylvia told herself with bitter pain, and again the tears sprang to her eyes, that no one in
     the wide world really cared for her. Those people who had been going to Switzerland had thrown
     her over without a thought. Anna Wolsky, who had spoken as if she really loved her only a day
     or two ago, and who had made that love her excuse for a somewhat impertinent interference in
     Sylvia's private affairs, had left Lacville without even sending her word that she was
     leaving!
True, she had a new and a delightful friend in Count Paul de Virieu. But what if Anna had
     been right? What if Count Paul were a dangerous friend, or, worse still, only amusing himself
     at her expense? True, he had taken her to see his sister; but that, after all, might not mean
     very much.
Sylvia Bailey went through a very mournful hour. She felt terribly depressed and unhappy, and
     at last, though there was still a considerable time to dinner, she went downstairs and out into
     the garden with a book.
And then, in a moment, everything was changed. From sad, she became happy; from mournful and
     self-pitying, full of exquisite content.
Looking up, Sylvia had seen the now familiar figure of Count Paul de Virieu hurrying towards
     her.
How early he had left Paris! She had understood that he meant to come back by the last train,
     or more probably to-morrow morning.
"Paris was so hot, and my sister found that friends of hers were passing through, so I came
     back earlier than I meant to do," he said a little lamely; and then, "Is anything the
     matter?"
He looked with quick, anxious concern into her pale face and red-lidded eyes. "Did you have a
     bad night at the tables?"
Sylvia shook her head.
"Something so strange—so unexpected—has happened." Her mouth quivered. "Anna Wolsky has left
     Lacville!"
"Left Lacville?" Count Paul repeated, in almost as incredulous a tone as that in which Sylvia
     herself had said the words when the news had been first brought her. "Have you and she
     quarrelled, Mrs. Bailey? You permit?" He waited till she looked up and said listlessly, "Yes,
     please do," before lighting his cigarette.
"Quarrelled? Oh, no! She has simply gone away without telling me!"
The Comte de Virieu looked surprised, but not particularly sorry.
"That's very strange," he said. "I should have thought your friend was not likely to leave
     Lacville for many weeks to come."
His acute French mind had already glanced at all the sides of the situation, and he was
     surprised at the mixed feelings which filled his heart. With the Polish woman gone, his young
     English friend was not likely to stay on at such a place as Lacville alone.
"But where has Madame Wolsky gone?" he asked quickly. "And why has she left? Surely she is
     coming back?" (Sylvia could certainly stay on a few days alone at Lacville, if her friend was
     coming back.)
But what was this that Mrs. Bailey was saying in so plaintive a tone?
"That's the extraordinary thing about it! I haven't the slightest idea where Anna is, or why
     she has left Lacville." In spite of herself her voice trembled. "She did not give me the
     slightest warning of what she was thinking of doing; in fact, only a few days ago, when we were
     talking of our future plans, I tried to persuade her to come back to England with me on a long
     visit."
"Tell me all that happened," he said, sitting down and speaking in the eager, kindly way he
     seemed to keep for Sylvia alone.
And then Sylvia told him. She described the coming of the messenger, her journey to the
     Pension Malfait, and she repeated, as far as was possible, the exact words of her friend's
     curiously-worded, abrupt letter to Madame Malfait.
"They all think," she said at last, "that Anna went to the Casino and lost all her money—both
     the money she made, and the money she brought here; and that then, not liking to tell even me
     anything about it, she made up her mind to go away."
"They all think this?" repeated Count Paul, meaningly. "Whom do you mean by
      all, Mrs. Bailey?"
"I mean the people at the Pension Malfait, and the Wachners—"
"Then you saw the Wachners to-day?"
"I met Madame Wachner as I was going to the Pension Malfait," said Sylvia, "and she went
     there with me. You see, the Wachners asked Anna to have supper with them yesterday, and they
     waited for her ever so long, but she never came. That makes it clear that she must have left
     Lacville some time in the early afternoon. I wish—I cannot help wishing—that I had not gone
     into Paris yesterday, Count Paul."
And then suddenly she realised how ungracious her words must sound.
"No, no," she cried, impetuously. "Of course, I do not mean that! I had a very, very happy
     time, and your sister was very kind and sweet to me. But it makes me unhappy to think that Anna
     may have been worried and anxious about money with me away—"
There was a pause, and then, in a very different voice, Sylvia Bailey asked the Comte de
     Virieu a question that seemed to him utterly irrelevant.
"Do you believe in fortune-tellers?" she asked abruptly. "Are you superstitious?"
"Like everyone else, I have been to such people," he answered indifferently. "But if you ask
     my true opinion—well, no; I am quite sceptical! There may be something in what these dealers in
     hope sometimes say, but more often there is nothing. In fact, you must remember that a witch
     generally tells her client what she believes her client wishes to hear."
"Madame Wachner is inclined to think that Anna left Lacville because of something which a
     fortune-teller told her—indeed told both of us—before we came here." Mrs. Bailey was digging
     the point of her parasol in the grass.
"Tiens! Tiens!" he exclaimed. "That is an odd idea! Pray tell me all about it. Did you and
     your friend consult a fashionable necromancer, or did you content yourselves with going to a
     cheap witch?"
"To quite a cheap witch."
Sylvia laughed happily; she was beginning to feel really better now. She rather wondered that
     she had never told Count Paul about that strange visit to the fortune-teller, but she had been
     taught, as are so many Englishwomen of her type, to regard everything savouring of superstition
     as not only silly and weak-minded, but also as rather discreditable.
"The woman called herself Madame Cagliostra," she went on gaily, "and she only charged five
     francs. In the end we did pay her fifteen. But she gave us plenty for our money, I assure
     you—in fact, I can't remember half the things she said!"
"And to you was prophesied—?" Count Paul leant forward and looked at her fixedly.
Sylvia blushed.
"Oh, she told me all sorts of things! As you say they don't really know anything; they only
     guess. One of the things that she told me was that it was possible, in fact, quite likely, that
     I should never go back to England—I mean at all! And that if I did so, I should go as a
     stranger. Wasn't that absurd?"
"Quite absurd," said Count Paul, quietly. "For even if you married again, Madame; if you
     married a Frenchman, for instance, you would still wish to go back to your own country
     sometimes—at least, I suppose so."
"Of course I should." And once more Sylvia reddened violently.
But this time Count Paul felt no pleasure in watching the flood of carmine staining not only
     the smooth, rounded cheek, but the white forehead and neck of his fair English friend.
Sylvia went on speaking, a little quickly.
"She said almost the same thing to Anna. Wasn't that odd? I mean she said that Anna would
     probably never go back to her own country. But what was really very strange was that she did
     not seem to be able to see into Anna's future at all. And then—oh well, she behaved very oddly.
     After we had gone she called us back—" Sylvia stopped for a moment.
"Well?" said Count Paul eagerly. "What happened then?"
He seldom allowed himself the pleasure of looking into Sylvia's blue eyes. Now he asked for
     nothing better than that she should go on talking while he went on looking at her.
"She made us stand side by side—you must understand, Count, that we had already paid her and
     gone away—when she called us back. She stared at us in a very queer sort of way, and said that
     we must not leave Paris, or if we did leave Paris, we must not leave together. She said that if
     we did so we should run into danger."
"All rather vague," observed the Count. "And, from the little I know of her, I should fancy
     Madame Wolsky the last woman in the world to be really influenced by that kind of thing."
He hardly knew what he was saying. His only wish was that Sylvia would go on talking to him
     in the intimate, confiding fashion she was now doing. Heavens! How wretched, how lonely he had
     felt in Paris after seeing her off the day before!
"Oh, but at the time Anna was very much impressed," said Sylvia, quickly. "Far more than I
     was—I know it made her nervous when she was first playing at the tables. And when she lost so
     much money the first week we were here she said to me, 'That woman was right. We ought not to
     have come to Lacville!' But afterwards, when she began to be so wonderfully lucky, she forgot
     all about it, or, rather, she only remembered that the woman had said to her that she would
     have a great run of luck."
"Then the woman said that, too," remarked Count Paul, absently.
(What was it his godmother had said? "I felicitate you on your conquest, naughty Paul!" and
     he had felt angry, even disgusted, with the old lady's cynical compliment. She had added,
     meaningly, "Why not turn over a new leaf? Why not marry this pretty creature? We should all be
     pleased to see you behave like a reasonable human being.")
But Sylvia was answering him.
"Yes, the woman said that Anna would be very lucky."
The Comte de Virieu thought for a moment, and then withdrew his eyes from his friend's
     face.
"I presume you have already telephoned to the hotel in Paris where you first met Madame
     Wolsky?"
"Why, it never occurred to me to do that!" cried Sylvia. "What a good idea!"
"Wait," he said. "I will go and do it for you."
But five minutes later he came back, shaking his head. "I am sorry to say the people at the
     Hôtel de l'Horloge know nothing of Madame Wolsky. They have had no news of her since you and
     she both left the place. I wonder if the Wachners know more of her disappearance than they have
     told you?"
"What do you mean?" asked Sylvia, very much surprised.
"They're such odd people," he said, in a dissatisfied voice. "And you know they were always
     with your friend. When you were not there, they hardly ever left her for a moment."
"But I thought I had told you how distressed they are about it? How they waited for her last
     evening and how she never came? Oh no, the Wachners know nothing," declared Sylvia
     confidently.
There is something very bewildering and distressing in the sudden disappearance or even the
     absence of a human being to whose affectionate and constant presence one has become accustomed.
     And as the hours went by, and no letter or message arrived from Anna Wolsky, Sylvia became
     seriously troubled, and spent much of her time walking to and from the Pension Malfait.
Surely Anna could not have left Paris, still less France, without her luggage? All sorts of
     dreadful possibilities crowded on Sylvia's mind; Anna Wolsky might have met with an accident:
     she might now be lying unidentified in a Paris hospital....
At last she grew so uneasy about her friend that she felt she must do something!
Mine host of the Villa du Lac was kind and sympathetic, but even he could suggest no way of
     finding out where Anna had gone.
And then Sylvia suddenly bethought herself that there was one thing she could do which she
     had not done: she could surely go to the police of Lacville and ask them to make inquiries in
     Paris as to whether there had been an accident of which the victim in any way recalled Anna
     Wolsky.
To her surprise, M. Polperro shook his head very decidedly.
"Oh no, do not go to the police!" he said in an anxious tone. "No, no, I do not advise you to
     do that! Heaven knows I would do anything in reason to help you, Madame, to find your friend.
     But I beg of you not to ask me to go for you to the police!"
Sylvia was very much puzzled. Why should M. Polperro be so unwilling to seek the help of the
     law in so simple a matter as this?
"I will go myself," she said.
And just then—they were standing in the hall together—the Comte de Virieu came up.
"What is it you will do yourself, Madame?" he asked, smiling.
Sylvia turned to him eagerly.
"I feel that I should like to speak to the police about Anna Wolsky," she exclaimed. "It is
     the first thing one would do in England if a friend suddenly disappeared—in fact, the police
     are always looking for people who have gone away in a mysterious manner. You see, I can't help
     being afraid, Count Paul"—she lowered her voice—"that Anna has met with some dreadful accident.
     She hasn't a friend in Paris! Suppose she is lying now in some hospital, unable to make herself
     understood? I only wish that I had a photograph of Anna that I could take to them."
"Well, there is a possibility that this may be so. But remember it is even more probable that
     Madame Wolsky is quite well, and that she will be annoyed at your taking any such step to find
     her."
"Yes," said Sylvia, slowly. "I know that is quite possible. And yet—and yet it is so very
     unlike Anna not to send me a word of explanation! And then, you know in that letter she left in
     her room at the Pension Malfait she positively promised to send a telegram about her luggage.
     Surely it is very strange that she has not done that?"
"Well, if you really wish the police communicated with," said the Comte de Virieu, "I will go
     to the police-station here, with pleasure."
"Why should we not go together?" asked Sylvia, hesitatingly.
"By all means. But think over what we are to say when we get there. If your friend had not
     left the letter behind her, then, of course it would be our positive duty to communicate with
     the police. But I cannot help being afraid—" He stopped abruptly.
"Of what are you afraid?" asked Sylvia eagerly.
"I am afraid that Madame Wolsky may be very much offended by your interference in the
     matter."
"Oh, no!" cried Sylvia. "Indeed, in that you are quite mistaken! I know Anna would never be
     offended by anything I could do. She was very fond of me, and so am I of her. But in any case I
     am willing to risk it. You see"—her voice broke, quivered—"I am really very unhappy about
     Anna—"
"When would you like to go to the Commissioner of Police?" asked the Count.
"Is there any reason why we should not go now?"
"No. Let us go at once. I only had the feeling that you might hear from her any moment."
Together they walked up into the little town of Lacville. To each any expedition in which the
     other took part had become delightful. They were together now more than they had ever been
     before. No, Count Paul could not be sorry that Sylvia's friend had left Lacville. He had no
     wish for her return.
At last they came to a rather mean-looking white house; out of one of the windows hung a
     tricolour flag.
"Here we are!" he said briefly.
"It doesn't look a very imposing place," said Sylvia smiling.
But all the same, as the Count rang the bell Sylvia suddenly felt as if she would like to run
     away! After all, what should she say to the Commissioner of Police? Would he think her
     interference in Anna's affairs strange and uncalled for? But she kept her thoughts to
     herself.
They were shown into a room where a tired-looking man bent over a large, ink-stained table
     littered over with papers.
"Monsieur? Madame?" he glanced up inquiringly, and gave them a searching look. But he did not
     rise from the table, as Sylvia expected him to do. "What can I do for you?" he said. "I am at
     your service," and again he stared with insistent curiosity at the couple before him, at the
     well-dressed young Englishwoman and at her French companion.
The Count explained at some length why they had come.
And then at last the Commissioner of Police got up.
"Madame has now been at Lacville three weeks?"—and he quickly made a note of the fact on a
     little tablet he held in his hand. "And her friend, a Polish lady named Wolsky, has left
     Lacville rather suddenly? Madame has, however, received a letter from her friend explaining
     that she had to leave unexpectedly?"
"No," said Sylvia, quickly, "the letter was not sent to me; it was left by my friend in her
     bed-room at the Pension Malfait. You see, the strange thing, Monsieur, is that Madame Wolsky
     left all her luggage. She took absolutely nothing with her, excepting, of course, her money.
     And as yet nothing has come from her, although she promised to telegraph where her luggage was
     to be sent on to her! I come to you because I am afraid that she had met with some accident in
     the Paris streets, and I thought you would be able to telephone for us to the Paris
     Police."
She looked very piteously at the French official, and his face softened, a kindly look came
     over it.
"Well, Madame," he said, "I will certainly do everything I can. But I must ask you to provide
     me first with a few more particulars about your friend."
"I will tell you everything I know. But I really do not know very much."
"Her age?" said the Commissioner.
"I do not know her age, but I suppose she is about thirty."
"The place of her birth?"
Sylvia shook her head.
"What is her permanent address? Surely you know with whom you could communicate the news of
     an accident having happened to her?"
"I am afraid I don't even know that." Sylvia began to feel rather foolish. But—but was it so
     strange after all? Who among the people she was now living with knew anything of her far-away
     English home? If anything happened to herself, for instance? Even Count Paul would not know to
     whom to write. It was an odd, rather an uncomfortable thought.
The Commissioner went to a drawer and pulled out from it a portfolio filled with loose pieces
     of paper.
"Malfait? Malfait? Malfait?" he muttered interrogatively to himself. And at last he found
     what he was looking for. It was a large sheet, on which was inscribed in large round letters
     "Pension Malfait." There were many close lines of writing under the words. He looked down and
     read through all that was there.
"The Pension Malfait has a good reputation!" he exclaimed, in a relieved tone. "I gather from
     what you say, Monsieur,"—he gave a quick shrewd look at the Count—"that Madame and her friend
     did not play in a serious sense at the Casino—I mean, there was no large sum of money in
     question?"
Count Paul hesitated—but Sylvia thought that surely it were better to tell the truth.
"Yes," she said, "my friend did play, and she played rather high. She must have had a large
     sum of money in her possession when she left Lacville, unless she lost it all on the last day.
     But I was in Paris, and so I don't know what she did."
The Commissioner looked grave.
"Ah, but that alters the case very much!" he said. "I must request you to come with me to the
     Pension Malfait. We had better pursue our inquiries there. If this Madame Wolsky had a large
     sum of money in notes and gold, it becomes very important that we should know where she
     is."
They all three left the shabby little house together, and Sylvia could not help wondering
     what would happen there while they were gone. But the Commissioner solved her doubts by turning
     the key in the door.
The Count hailed a cab, and they all got into it. Then followed a curious little drive. The
     Commissioner made polite conversation with Mrs. Bailey. He spoke of the beauties of Lacville.
     "And Madame," he said, pleasantly, "is staying at the Villa du Lac? It is a charming house,
     with historic associations."
Sylvia was surprised. She remembered clearly that she had not told the police official where
     she was staying.
When they reached the Pension Malfait they were kept waiting a few moments, but at last M.
     Malfait appeared in the hall. He received them with obsequious amiability.
Still, even Sylvia could not but be aware that he was extremely angry, and she herself felt
     wretchedly uncomfortable. What if Anna Wolsky were all right after all? Would she not blame her
     for having made such a fuss?
"Everything is quite en règle," M. Malfait said smoothly when the purport of their
     presence was explained to him in a few curt words by the Commissioner of Police.
"You see, Monsieur le Commissaire, it is quite simple. The lady left us a letter explaining
     why she was obliged to go away. I do not know why Madame"—he turned to Sylvia—"thought it
     necessary to go to you? We have been perfectly open about the whole matter. We are respectable
     people, and have absolutely nothing to hide. Madame Wolsky's boxes are there, in her bed-room;
     I might have let the room twice over since she left, but no, I prefer to wait, hoping that the
     lady—the very charming lady—will come back."
"By the way, where is the letter which she left?" said the Commissioner in a business-like
     voice. "I should like to see that letter."
"Where is the letter?" repeated Monsieur Malfait vaguely. Then in a loud voice, he said, "I
     will ask my wife for the letter. She looks after the correspondence."
Madame Malfait came forward. She looked even more annoyed than her husband had looked when he
     had seen by whom Sylvia was accompanied.
"The letter?" she repeated shortly. "Mon Dieu! I do not know where I have put it. But by this
     time I almost know it by heart. It was a pleasing letter, for it spoke very warmly of our
     establishment. But where is the letter?" she looked round her, as if she expected to find it
     suddenly appear.
"Ah! I remember to whom I showed it last! It was to that agreeable friend of Madame
     Wolsky"—she put an emphasis on the word "agreeable," and stared hard at Sylvia as she did so.
     "It was to that Madame Wachner I last showed it. Perhaps she put it in her pocket, and forgot
     to give it me back. I know she said she would like her husband to see it. Monsieur and Madame
     Wachner often take their meals here. I will ask them if they have the letter."
"Well, at any rate, we had better open Madame Wolsky's trunks; that may give us some clue,"
     said the Commissioner in a weary voice.
And, to Sylvia's confusion and distress, they all then proceeded to the bed-room where she
     had last seen her friend, and there Monsieur Malfait broke the locks of Anna Wolsky's two large
     trunks.
But the contents of Anna's trunks taught them nothing. They were only the kind of objects and
     clothes that a woman who travelled about the world a great deal would naturally take with her.
     Everything, however, was taken out, turned over, and looked at.
"If your friend possessed a passport," said the police official in a dissatisfied tone, "she
     has evidently taken it with her. There is nothing of any consequence at all in those boxes. We
     had better shut them up again, and leave them."
But when they came down again into the hall, he suddenly asked Monsieur Malfait, "Well, where
     is the letter?" He had evidently forgotten Madame Malfait's involved explanation.
"I will send you the letter to-morrow," said Monsieur Malfait smoothly. "The truth is, we
     handed it to a lady who was also a friend of Madame Wolsky, and she evidently forgot to give it
     back to us. We will find out whether she has kept it."
On the way back the Commissioner of Police said gaily,
"It is quite clear that Madame"—he turned and bowed courteously to Sylvia—"knows very little
     of Lacville, Monsieur le Comte! Why, people are always disappearing from Lacville! My time
     would indeed be full were I to follow all those who go away in a hurry—not but what I have been
     only too delighted to do this for Madame and for Monsieur le Comte."
He then bowed to the Count and stared smilingly at Sylvia.
"I am pleased to think," he went on playfully, "that Madame herself is not likely to meet
     with any unpleasant adventure here, for the Villa du Lac is a most excellent and well-conducted
     house. Be assured, Madame, that I will find out in the next few hours if your friend has met
     with an accident in the Paris streets."
He left them at the gate of the Villa.
When the Commissioner had quite disappeared, the Count observed, "Well, we have done what you
     wished. But it has not had much result, has it?"
Sylvia shook her head disconsolately.
"No, Count Paul. I am afraid I made a mistake in going to the police. The Malfaits are
     evidently very angry with me! And yet—and yet, you know in England it's the first thing that
     people do."
Count Paul laughed kindly.
"It is a matter of absolutely no consequence. But you see, you never quite understand, my
     dear friend, that Lacville is a queer place, and that here, at any rate, the hotel-keepers are
     rather afraid of the police. I was even glad that the Commissioner did not ask to look over
      your boxes, and did not exact a passport from you!"
More seriously he added, "But I see that you are dreadfully anxious about Madame Wolsky, and
     I myself will communicate with the Paris police about the matter. It is, as you say, possible,
     though not probable, that she met with an accident after leaving you."
A long week went by, and still no news, no explanation of her abrupt departure from Lacville,
     was received from Anna Wolsky; and the owners of the Pension Malfait were still waiting for
     instructions as to what was to be done with Madame Wolsky's luggage, and with the various
     little personal possessions she had left scattered about her room.
As for Sylvia, it sometimes seemed to her as if her Polish friend had been obliterated,
     suddenly blotted out of existence.
But as time went on she felt more and more pained and discomfited by Anna's strange and
     heartless behaviour to herself. Whatever the reason for Madame Wolsky's abrupt departure, it
     would not have taken her a moment to have sent Sylvia Bailey a line—if only to say that she
     could give no explanation of her extraordinary conduct.
Fortunately there were many things to distract Sylvia's thoughts from Anna Wolsky. She now
     began each morning with a two hours' ride with Paul de Virieu. She had a graceful seat, and had
     been well taught; only a little practice, so the Count assured her, was needed to make her into
     a really good horsewoman, the more so that she was very fearless.
Leaving the flat plain of Lacville far behind them, they would make their way into the Forest
     of Montmorency, and through to the wide valley, which is so beautiful and so little known to
     most foreign visitors to Paris.
The Duchesse d'Eglemont had sent her maid to Lacville with the riding habit she was lending
     Sylvia, and by a word M. Polperro let fall, the Englishwoman realised, with mingled confusion
     and amusement, that the hotel-keeper supposed her to be an old and intimate friend of Count
     Paul's sister.
The other people in the hotel began to treat her with marked cordiality.
And so it came to pass that outwardly the Polish lady's disappearance came to be regarded
     even by Sylvia as having only been a ripple on the pleasant, lazy, agreeable life she, Count
     Paul, and last, not least, the Wachners, were all leading at Lacville.
In fact, as the days went on, only Mrs. Bailey herself and that kindly couple, Madame Wachner
     and her silent husband, seemed to remember that Anna had ever been there. During the first
     days, when Sylvia had been really very anxious and troubled, she had had cause to be grateful
     to the Wachners for their sympathy; for whereas Paul de Virieu seemed only interested in Anna
     Wolsky because she, Sylvia, herself was interested, both Madame Wachner and her morose, silent
     husband showed real concern and distress at the mysterious lack of news.
Whenever Sylvia saw them, and she saw them daily at the Casino, either Madame Wachner or
     L'Ami Fritz would ask her in an eager, sympathetic voice, "Have you had news of Madame
     Wolsky?"
And then, when she shook her head sadly, they would express—and especially Madame Wachner
     would express—increasing concern and surprise at Anna's extraordinary silence.
"If only she had come to us as she arranged to do!" the older woman exclaimed more than once
     in a regretful tone. "Then, at any rate, we should know something; she would not have concealed
     her plans from us entirely; we were, if new friends, yet on such kind, intimate terms with the
     dear soul!"
And now, as had been the case exactly a week ago, Sylvia was resting in her room. She was
     sitting just as she had then sat, in a chair drawn up close to the window. There had been no
     ride that morning, for Paul de Virieu had been obliged to go into Paris for the day.
Sylvia felt dull and listless. She had never before experienced that aching longing for the
     presence of another human being which in our civilised life is disguised under many names, but
     which in this case, Sylvia herself called by that of "friendship."
Moreover, she had received that morning a letter which had greatly disturbed her. It now lay
     open on her lap, for she had just read it through again. This letter was quite short, and
     simply contained the news that Bill Chester, her good friend, sometime lover, and trustee, was
     going to Switzerland after all, and that he would stop a couple of days in Paris in order to
     see her.
It was really very nice of Bill to do this, and a month ago Sylvia would have looked forward
     to seeing him. But now everything was changed, and Sylvia could well have dispensed with Bill
     Chester's presence.
The thought of Chester at Lacville filled her with unease. When she had left her English home
     two months ago—it seemed more like two years than two months—she had felt well disposed to the
     young lawyer, and deep in her inmost heart she had almost brought herself to acknowledge that
     she might very probably in time become his wife.
She suspected that Chester had been fond of her when she was a girl, at a time when his means
     would not have justified him in proposing to her, for he was one of those unusual men who think
     it dishonourable to ask girls to marry them unless they are in a position to keep a wife. She
     remembered how he had looked—how set and stern his face had become when someone had suddenly
     told him in her presence of her engagement to George Bailey, the middle-aged man who had been
     so kind to her, and yet who had counted for so little in her life, though she had given him all
     she could of love and duty.
Since her widowhood, so she now reminded herself remorsefully, Chester had been
     extraordinarily good to her, and his devotion had touched her because it was expressed in
     actions rather than in words, for he was also the unusual type of man, seldom a romantic type,
     who scorns, however much in love, to take advantage of a fiduciary position to strengthen his
     own.
The fact that he was her trustee brought them into frequent conflict. Too often Bill was the
     candid friend instead of the devoted lover. Their only real quarrel—if quarrel it could be
     called—had been, as we know, over the purchase of her string of pearls. But time, or so Sylvia
     confidently believed, had proved her to have been right, for her "investment," as she always
     called it to Bill Chester, had improved in value.
But though she had been right in that comparatively trifling matter, she knew that Chester
     would certainly disapprove of the kind of life—the idle, purposeless, frivolous life—she was
     now leading.
Looking out over the lake, which, as it was an exceedingly hot, fine day, was already crowded
     with boats, Sylvia almost made up her mind to go back into Paris for two or three days.
Bill would think it a very strange thing that she was staying here in Lacville all by
     herself. But the thought of leaving Lacville just now was very disagreeable to Sylvia.... She
     wondered uncomfortably what her trustee would think of her friendship with Count Paul de
     Virieu—with this Frenchman who, when he was not gambling at the Casino, spent every moment of
     his time with her.
But deep in her heart Sylvia knew well that when Bill Chester was there Paul de Virieu would
     draw back; only when they were really alone together did he talk eagerly, naturally.
In the dining-room of the Villa he hardly ever spoke to her, and when they were both in the
     Baccarat-room of the Club he seldom came and stood by her side, though when she looked up she
     often found his eyes fixed on her with that ardent, absorbed gaze which made her heart beat,
     and her cheeks flush with mingled joy and pain.
Suddenly, as if her thoughts had brought him there, she saw Count Paul's straight, slim
     figure turn in from the road through the gates of the Villa.
He glanced up at her window and took off his hat. He looked cool, unruffled, and
     self-possessed, but her eager eyes saw a change in his face. He looked very grave, and yet
     oddly happy. Was it possible that he had news at last of Anna Wolsky?
He mounted the stone-steps and disappeared into the house; and Sylvia, getting up, began
     moving restlessly about her room. She longed to go downstairs, and yet a feminine feeling of
     delicacy restrained her from doing so.
A great stillness brooded over everything. The heat had sent everyone indoors. M. Polperro,
     perhaps because of his Southern up-bringing, always took an early afternoon siesta. It looked
     as if his servants followed his example. The Villa du Lac seemed asleep.
Sylvia went across to the other window, the window overlooking the large, shady garden, and
     there, glancing down, she saw Count Paul.
"Come into the garden—," he said softly in English; and Sylvia, leaning over the bar of her
     window, thought he added the word "Maud"—but of course that could not have been so, for her
     name, as the Count knew well, was Sylvia! And equally of course he always addressed her as
     "Madame."
"It's so nice and cool up here," she whispered back. "I don't believe it is half so cool in
     the garden!"
She gazed down into his upturned face with innocent coquetry, pretending—only pretending—to
     hesitate as to what she would do in answer to his invitation.
But Sylvia Bailey was but an amateur at the Great Game, the game at which only two—only a man
     and a woman—can play, and yet which is capable of such infinite, such bewilderingly protean
     variations. So her next move, one which Paul de Virieu, smiling behind his moustache,
     foresaw—was to turn away from the window.
She ran down the broad shallow staircase very quickly, for it had occurred to her that the
     Count, taking her at her word, might leave the garden, and, sauntering off to the Casino, lose
     his money—for whatever he might be in love, Count Paul was exceedingly unlucky at cards! And
     lately she had begun to think that she was gradually weaning her friend from what she knew to
     be in his case, whatever it was in hers, and in that of many of the people about them, the
     terrible vice of gambling.
When, a little breathless, she joined him in the garden, she found that he had already taken
     two rocking-chairs into a shady corner which was out of sight of the white villa and of its
     inquisitive windows.
"Something very serious has happened," said Count Paul slowly.
He took both her hands in his and looked down into her face. With surprise and concern she
     saw that his eyelids were red. Was it possible that Count Paul had been crying? He almost
     looked as if he had.
The idea of a grown-up man allowing himself to give way to emotion of that sort would have
     seemed absurd to Sylvia a short time ago, but somehow the thought that Paul de Virieu had shed
     tears made her feel extraordinarily moved.
"What is the matter?" she asked anxiously. "Has anything happened to your sister?"
"Thank God—no!" he answered hastily. "But something else, something which was to be expected,
     but which I did not expect, has happened—"
And then, very gravely, and at last releasing her hands, he added, "My kind godmother, the
     little Marquise you met last week, died last night."
Sylvia felt the sudden sense of surprise, almost of discomfiture, the young always feel in
     the neighbourhood of death.
"How dreadful! She seemed quite well when we saw her that day—"
She could still hear echoing in her ears the old lady's half-mocking but kindly
     compliments.
"Ah! but she was very, very old—over ninety! Why, she was supposed to be aged when she became
     my godmother thirty odd years ago!"
He waited a moment, and then added, quietly, "She has left me in her will two hundred
     thousand francs."
"Oh, I am glad!"
Sylvia stretched out both hands impulsively, and the Comte de Virieu took first one and then
     the other and raised them to his lips.
"Eight thousand pounds? Does it seem a fortune to you, Madame?"
"Of course it does!" exclaimed Sylvia.
"It frees me from the necessity of being a pensioner on my brother-in-law," he said slowly,
     and Sylvia felt a little chill of disappointment. Was that his only pleasure in his legacy?
"You will not play with this money?" she said, in a low voice.
"It is no use my making a promise, especially to you, that I might not be able to keep—"
He got up, and stood looking down at her.
"But I promise that I will not waste or risk this money if I can resist the temptation to do
     so."
Sylvia smiled, though she felt more inclined to cry.
He seemed stung by her look.
"Do you wish me to give you my word of honour that I will not risk any of this money at the
     tables?" he asked, almost in a whisper.
Sylvia's heart began to beat. Count Paul had become very pale. There was a curious expression
     on his face—an expression of revolt, almost of anger.
"Do you exact it?" he repeated, almost violently.
And Sylvia faltered out, "Could you keep your word if I did exact it?"
"Ah, you have learnt to know me too well!"
He walked away, leaving her full of perplexity and pain.
A few moments passed. They seemed very long moments to Sylvia Bailey. Then Count Paul turned
     and came back.
He sat down, and made a great effort to behave as if nothing unusual or memorable had passed
     between them.
"And has anything happened here?" he asked. "Is there any news of your vanished friend?"
Sylvia shook her head gravely. The Polish woman's odd, and, to her, inexplicable, conduct
     still hurt her almost as much as it had done at first.
The Count leant forward, and speaking this time very seriously indeed, he said, in a low
     voice:—
"I wish to say something to you, and I am now going to speak as frankly as if you were—my
     sister. You are wrong to waste a moment of your time in regretting Madame Wolsky. She is an
     unhappy woman, held tightly in the paws of the tiger—Play. That is the truth, my friend! It is
     a pity you ever met her, and I am glad she went away without doing you any further mischief. It
     was bad enough of her to have brought you to Lacville, and taught you to gamble. Had she stayed
     on, she would have tried in time to make you go on with her to Monte Carlo."
He shook his head expressively
Sylvia looked at him with surprise. He had never spoken to her of Anna in this way before.
     She hesitated, then said a little nervously,
"Tell me, did you ask Madame Wolsky to go away? Please don't mind my asking you this?"
"I ask Madame Wolsky to go away?" he repeated, genuinely surprised. "Such a thought
     never even crossed my mind. It would have been very impertinent—what English people would call
     'cheeky'—of me to do such a thing! You must indeed think me a hypocrite! Have I not shared your
     surprise and concern at her extraordinary disappearance? And her luggage? If I had wished her
     to go away, I should not have encouraged her to leave all her luggage behind her!" he spoke
     with the sarcastic emphasis of which the French are masters.
Sylvia grew very red.
As a matter of fact, it had been Madame Wachner who had suggested that idea to her. Only the
     day before, when Sylvia had been wondering for the thousandth time where Anna could be, the
     older woman had exclaimed meaningly, "I should not be surprised if that Count de Virieu
     persuaded your friend to go away. He wants the field clear for himself."
And then she had seemed to regret her imprudent words, and she had begged Sylvia not to give
     the Count any hint of her suspicion. Even now Sylvia did not mention Madame Wachner.
"Of course, I don't think you a hypocrite," she said awkwardly, "but you never did like poor
     Anna, and you were always telling me that Lacville isn't a place where a nice woman ought to
     stay long. I thought you might have said something of the same kind to Madame Wolsky."
"And do you really suppose," Count Paul spoke with a touch of sharp irony in his voice, "that
     your friend would have taken my advice? Do you think that Madame Wolsky would look either to
     the right or the left when the Goddess of Chance beckoned?"—and he waved his hand in the
     direction where the white Casino lay.
"But the Goddess of Chance did not beckon to her to leave Lacville!" Sylvia exclaimed. "Why,
     she meant to stay on here till the middle of September—"
"You asked me a very indiscreet question just now"—the Count leant forward, and looked
     straight into Mrs. Bailey's eyes.
His manner had again altered. He spoke far more authoritatively than he had ever spoken
     before, and Sylvia, far from resenting this new, possessive attitude, felt thrilled and glad.
     When Bill Chester spoke as if he had authority over her, it always made her indignant, even
     angry.
"Did I?" she said nervously.
"Yes! You asked me if I had persuaded Madame Wolsky to leave Lacville. Well, now I ask you,
     in my turn, whether it has ever occurred to you that the Wachners know more of your Polish
     friend's departure than they admit? I gathered that impression the only time I talked to your
     Madame Wachner about the matter. I felt sure she knew more than she would say! Of course, it
     was only an impression."
Sylvia hesitated.
"At first Madame Wachner seemed annoyed that I made a fuss about it," she said thoughtfully.
     "But later she seemed as surprised and sorry as I am myself. Oh, no, Count, I am sure you are
     wrong—why you forget that Madame Wachner walked up to the Pension Malfait that same evening—I
     mean the evening of the day Anna left Lacville. In fact, it was Madame Wachner who first found
     out that Anna had not come home. She went up to her bed-room to look for her."
"Then it was Madame Wachner who found the letter?" observed the Count interrogatively.
"Oh, no, it was not Madame Wachner who found it. Anna's letter was discovered the next
     morning by the chambermaid in a blotting-book on the writing table. No one had thought of
     looking there. You see they were all expecting her back that night. Madame Malfait still thinks
     that poor Anna went to the Casino in the afternoon, and after having lost her money came back
     to the pension, wrote the letter, and then went out and left for Paris without saying anything
     about it to anyone!"
"I suppose something of that sort did happen," observed the Comte de Virieu thoughtfully.
"And now," he said, getting up from his chair, "I think I will take a turn at the Casino
     after all!"
Sylvia's lip quivered, but she was too proud to appeal to him to stay. Still, she felt
     horribly hurt.
"You see what I am like," he said, in a low, shamed voice. "I wish you had made me give you
     my word of honour."
She got up. It was cruel, very cruel, of him to say that to her. How amazingly their relation
     to one another had altered in the last half-hour!
For the moment they were enemies, and it was the enemy in Sylvia that next spoke. "I think I
     shall go and have tea with the Wachners. They never go to the Casino on Saturday
     afternoons."
A heavy cloud came over Count Paul's face.
"I can't think what you see to like in that vulgar old couple," he exclaimed irritably. "To
     me there is something"—he hesitated, seeking for an English word which should exactly express
     the French word "louche"—"sinister—that is the word I am looking for—there is to me
     something sinister about the Wachners."
"Sinister?" echoed Sylvia, really surprised. "Why, they seem to me to be the most
     good-natured, commonplace people in the world, and then they're so fond of one another!"
"I grant you that," he said. "I quite agree that that ugly old woman is very fond of her 'Ami
     Fritz'—but I do not know if he returns the compliment!"
Sylvia looked pained, nay more, shocked.
"I suppose French husbands only like their wives when they are young and pretty," she said
     slowly.
"Another of the many injustices you are always heaping on my poor country," the Count
     protested lightly. "But I confess I deserved it this time! Joking apart, I think 'L'Ami Fritz'
     is very fond of his"—he hesitated, then ended his sentence with "Old Dutch!"
Sylvia could not help smiling.
"It is too bad of you," she exclaimed, "to talk like that! The Wachners are very nice people,
     and I won't allow you to say anything against them!"
Somehow they were friends again. His next words proved it.
"I will not say anything against the Wachners this afternoon. In fact, if you will allow me
     to do so, I will escort you part of the way."
And he was even better than his word, for he went on with Sylvia till they were actually
     within sight of the little, isolated villa where the Wachners lived.
There, woman-like, she made an effort to persuade him to go in with her.
"Do come," she said urgently. "Madame Wachner would be so pleased! She was saying the other
     day that you had never been to their house."
But Count Paul smilingly shook his head.
"I have no intention of ever going there," he said deliberately. "You see I do not like them!
     I suppose—I hope"—he looked again straight into Sylvia Bailey's ingenuous blue eyes—"that the
     Wachners have never tried to borrow money of you?"
"Never!" she cried, blushing violently. "Never, Count Paul! Your dislike of my poor friends
     makes you unjust—it really does."
"It does! It does! I beg their pardon and yours. I was foolish, nay, far worse, indiscreet,
     to ask you this question. I regret I did so. Accept my apology."
She looked at him to see if he was sincere. His face was very grave; and she looked at him
     with perplexed, unhappy eyes.
"Oh, don't say that!" she said. "Why should you mind saying anything to me?"
But the Comte de Virieu was both vexed and angry with himself.
"It is always folly to interfere in anyone else's affairs," he muttered. "But I have this
     excuse—I happen to know that last week, or rather ten days ago, the Wachners were in
     considerable difficulty about money. Then suddenly they seemed to have found plenty, in fact,
     to be as we say here, 'à flot'; I confess that I foolishly imagined, nay, I almost
     hoped, that they owed this temporary prosperity to you! But of course I had no business to
     think about it at all—still less any business to speak to you about the matter. Forgive me, I
     will not so err again."
And then, with one of his sudden, stiff bows, the Comte de Virieu turned on his heel, leaving
     Sylvia to make her way alone to the little wooden gate on which were painted the words "Châlet
     des Muguets."
Sylvia pushed open the little white gate of the Châlet des Muguets and began walking up the
     path which lay through the neglected, untidy garden.
To eyes accustomed to the exquisitely-kept gardens of an English country town, there was
     something almost offensive in the sight presented by the high, coarse grass and luxuriant
     unkemptness of the place, and once more Sylvia wondered how the Wachners could bear to leave
     the land surrounding their temporary home in such a state.
But the quaint, fantastic-looking, one-storeyed châlet amused and rather interested her, for
     it was so entirely unlike any other dwelling with which she was acquainted.
To-day a deep, hot calm brooded over the silent house and deserted-looking garden; the
     chocolate-coloured shutters of the dining-room and the drawing-room were closed, and Sylvia
     told herself that it would be delightful to pass from the steamy heat outside into the
     dimly-lighted, sparsely-furnished little "salon," there to have a cup of tea and a pleasant
     chat with her friends before accompanying them in the cool of the early evening to the
     Casino.
Sylvia always enjoyed talking to Madame Wachner. She was a little bit ashamed that this was
     so, for this cosmopolitan woman's conversation was not always quite refined, but she was
     good-natured and lively, and her talk was invariably amusing. Above all, she knew how to
     flatter, and after a chat with Madame Wachner Sylvia Bailey always felt pleased both with
     herself and with the world about her.
There was very little concerning the young Englishwoman's simple, uneventful life with which
     Madame Wachner was not by now acquainted. She was aware for instance, that Sylvia had no close
     relations of her own, and that, like Anna Wolsky, Mrs. Bailey knew nobody—she had not even an
     acquaintance—living in Paris.
This fact had enlisted to a special degree Madame Wachner's interest and liking for the two
     young widows.
Sylvia rang the primitive bell which hung by the door which alone gave access, apart from the
     windows, to the Châlet des Muguets.
After some moments the day-servant employed by Madame Wachner opened the door with the curt
     words, "Monsieur and Madame are in Paris." The woman added, in a rather insolent tone, "They
     have gone to fetch some money," and her manner said plainly enough, "Yes, my master and
     mistress—silly fools—have lost their money at the Casino, and now they are gone to get fresh
     supplies!"
Sylvia felt vexed and disappointed. After what had been to her a very exciting, agitating
     conversation with Count Paul, she had unconsciously longed for the cheerful, commonplace talk
     of Madame Wachner.
As she stood there in the bright sunlight the thought of the long, lonely, hot walk back to
     the Villa du Lac became odious to her.
Why should she not go into the house and rest awhile? The more so that the Wachners would
     almost certainly return home very soon. They disliked Paris, and never stayed more than a
     couple of hours on their occasional visits there.
In her careful, rather precise French, she told the servant she would come in and wait.
"I am sure that Madame Wachner would wish me to do so," she said, smiling; and after a rather
     ungracious pause the woman admitted her into the house, leading the way into the darkened
     dining-room.
"Do you think it will be long before Madame Wachner comes back?" asked Sylvia.
The woman hesitated—"I cannot tell you that," she mumbled. "They never say when they are
     going, or when they will be back. They are very odd people!"
She bustled out of the room for a few moments and then came back, holding a big cotton
     parasol in her hand.
"I do not know if Madame wishes to stay on here by herself? As for me, I must go now, for my
     work is done. Perhaps when Madame leaves the house she will put the key under the mat."
"Yes, if I leave the house before my friends return home I will certainly do so. But I expect
     Madame Wachner will be here before long."
Sylvia spoke shortly. She did not like the day-servant's independent, almost rude way of
     speaking.
"Should the master and mistress come back before Madame has left, will Madame kindly explain
     that she insisted on coming into the house? I am absolutely forbidden to admit
     visitors unless Madame Wachner is here to entertain them."
The woman spoke quickly, her eyes fixed expectantly on the lady sitting before her.
Mrs. Bailey suddenly realised, or thought she realised, what that look meant. She took her
     purse out of her pocket and held out a two-franc piece.
"Certainly," she answered coldly, "I will explain to Madame Wachner that I insisted on coming
     in to rest."
The woman's manner altered; it became at once familiar and servile. After profusely thanking
     Sylvia for her "tip," she laid the cotton parasol on the dining-table, put her arms akimbo, and
     suddenly asked, "Has Madame heard any news of her friend? I mean of the Polish lady?"
"No," Sylvia looked up surprised. "I'm sorry to say that there is still no news of her, but,
     of course, there will be soon."
She was astonished that the Wachners should have mentioned the matter to this disagreeable,
     inquisitive person.
"The lady stopped here on her way to the station. She seemed in very high spirits."
"Oh, no, you are quite mistaken," said Sylvia quickly. "Madame Wolsky did not come here at
     all the day she left Lacville. She was expected, both to tea and to supper, but she did not
     arrive—"
"Indeed, yes, Madame! I had to come back that afternoon, for I had forgotten to bring in some
     sugar. The lady was here then, and she was still here when I left the house."
"I assure you that this cannot have been on the day my friend left Lacville," said Mrs.
     Bailey quickly. "Madame Wolsky left on a Saturday afternoon. As I told you just now, Madame
     Wachner expected her to supper, but she never came. She went to Paris instead."
The servant looked at her fixedly, and Sylvia's face became what it seldom was—very
     forbidding in expression. She wished this meddling, familiar woman would go away and leave her
     alone.
"No doubt Madame knows best! One day is like another to me. I beg Madame's pardon."
The Frenchwoman took up her parasol and laid the house key on the table, then, with a
      "Bon jour, Madame, et encore merci bien!" she noisily closed the door behind her.
A moment later, Sylvia, with a sense of relief, found herself in sole possession of the
     Châlet des Muguets.
Even the quietest, the most commonplace house has, as it were, an individuality that sets it
     apart from other houses. And even those who would deny that proposition must admit that every
     inhabited dwelling has its own special nationality.
The Châlet des Muguets was typically French and typically suburban; but where it differed
     from thousands of houses of the same type, dotted round in the countrysides within easy reach
     of Paris, was that it was let each year to a different set of tenants.
In Sylvia Bailey's eyes the queer little place lacked all the elements which go to make a
     home; and, sitting there, in that airless, darkened dining-room, she wondered, not for the
     first time, why the Wachners chose to live in such a comfortless way.
She glanced round her with distaste. Everything was not only cheap, but common and tawdry.
     Still, the dining-room, like all the other rooms in the châlet, was singularly clean, and
     almost oppressively neat.
There was the round table at which she and Anna Wolsky had been so kindly entertained, the
     ugly buffet or sideboard, and in place of the dull parquet floor she remembered on her first
     visit lay an ugly piece of linoleum, of which the pattern printed on the surface simulated a
     red and blue marble pavement.
Once more the change puzzled her, perhaps unreasonably.
At last Sylvia got up from the hard cane chair on which she had been sitting.
There had come over her, in the half-darkness, a very peculiar sensation—an odd feeling that
     there was something alive in the room. She looked down, half expecting to see some small animal
     crouching under the table, or hiding by the walnut-wood buffet behind her.
But, no; nothing but the round table, and the six chairs stiffly placed against the wall, met
     her eyes. And yet, still that feeling that there was in the room some sentient creature besides
     herself persisted.
She opened the door giving into the hall, and walked through the short passage which divided
     the house into two portions, into the tiny "salon."
Here also the closed shutters gave the room a curious, eerie look of desolate greyness. But
     Sylvia's eyes, already accustomed to the half-darkness next door, saw everything perfectly.
The little sitting-room looked mean and shabby. There was not a flower, not even a book or a
     paper, to relieve its prim ugliness. The only ornaments were a gilt clock on the mantelpiece,
     flanked with two sham Empire candelabra. The shutters were fastened closely, and the room was
     dreadfully hot and airless.
Once more Sylvia wondered why the Wachners preferred to live in this cheerless way, with a
     servant who only came for a few hours each day, rather than at an hotel or boarding-house.
And then she reminded herself that, after all, the silent, gaunt man, and his talkative,
     voluble wife, seemed to be on exceptionally good terms the one with the other. Perhaps they
     really preferred being alone together than in a more peopled atmosphere.
While moving aimlessly about the room, Sylvia began to feel unaccountably nervous and
     oppressed. She longed to be away from this still, empty house, and yet it seemed absurd to
     leave just as the Wachners would be returning home.
After a few more minutes, however, the quietude, and the having absolutely nothing to do with
     which to wile away the time, affected Sylvia's nerves.
It was, after all, quite possible that the Wachners intended to wait in Paris till the heat
     of the day was over. In that case they would not be back till seven o'clock.
The best thing she could do would be to leave a note inviting Madame Wachner and L'Ami Fritz
     to dinner at the Villa du Lac. Count Paul was to be in Paris this evening, so his eyes would
     not be offended by the sight of the people of whom he so disapproved. Madame Wachner would
     probably be glad to dine out, the more so that no proper meal seemed to have been prepared by
     that unpleasant day-servant. Why, the woman had not even laid the cloth for her employers'
     supper!
Sylvia looked instinctively round for paper and envelopes, but there was no writing-table,
     not even a pencil and paper, in the little drawing-room. How absurd and annoying!
But, stay—somewhere in the house there must be writing materials.
Treading softly, and yet hearing her footsteps echoing with unpleasant loudness through the
     empty house, Sylvia Bailey walked past the open door of the little kitchen, and so to the end
     of the passage.
Then something extraordinary happened.
While in the act of opening the door of Madame Wachner's bed-room, the young Englishwoman
     stopped and caught her breath. Again she had suddenly experienced that unpleasant, eerie
     sensation—the sensation that she was not alone. But this time the feeling was far more
     vivid than it had been in the dining-room.
So strong, so definite was Sylvia's perception of another presence, and this time of a human
     presence, in the still house, that she turned sharply round—
But all she saw was the empty passage, cut by a shaft of light thrown from the open door of
     the kitchen, stretching its short length down to the entrance hall.
Making a determined effort over what she could but suppose to be her nerves, she walked
     through into the Wachners' bed-room.
It was very bare and singularly poorly furnished, at least to English eyes, but it was
     pleasantly cool after the drawing-room.
She walked across to the window, and, drawing aside the muslin curtains, looked out.
Beyond the patch of shade thrown by the house the sun beat down on a ragged, unkempt lawn,
     but across the lawn she noticed, much more particularly than she had done on the two former
     occasions when she had been in the house, that there lay a thick grove of chestnut trees just
     beyond the grounds of the Châlet des Muguets.
A hedge separated the lawn from the wood, but like everything else in the little property it
     had been neglected, and there were large gaps in it.
She turned away from the window—
Yes, there, at last, was what she had come into this room to seek! Close to the broad, low
     bed was a writing-table, or, rather, a deal table, covered with a turkey red cloth, on which
     lay a large sheet of ink-stained, white blotting-paper.
Flanking the blotting-paper was a pile of Monsieur Wachner's little red books—the books in
     which he so carefully noted the turns of the game at the Casino, and which served him as the
     basis of his elaborate gambling "systems."
Sylvia went up to the writing-table, and, bending over it, began looking for some notepaper.
     But there was nothing of the sort to be seen; neither paper nor envelopes lay on the table.
This was the more absurd, as there were several pens, and an inkpot filled to the brim.
She told herself that the only thing to do was to tear a blank leaf out of one of L'Ami
     Fritz's note-books, and on it write her message of invitation. If she left the little sheet of
     paper propped up on the dining-table, the Wachners would be sure to see it.
She took up the newest-looking of the red note-books, and as she opened it she suddenly felt,
     and for the third time, that there was a living presence close to her—and this time that it was
     that of Anna Wolsky!
It was an extraordinary sensation—vivid, uncanny, terrifying—the more so that Sylvia Bailey
     not only believed herself to be alone in the house, but supposed Anna to be far from
     Lacville....
Fortunately, this unnerving and terrifying impression of an unseen and yet real presence did
     not endure; and, as she focussed her eyes on the open book she held in her hand, it became
     fainter and fainter, while she realised, with a keen sense of relief, what it was that had
     brought the presence of her absent friend so very near to her.
There, actually lying open before her, between two leaves of the little note-book, was a
     letter signed by Anna Wolsky! It was a short note, in French, apparently an answer to one
     Madame Wachner had sent reminding her of her engagement. It was odd that the Wachners had said
     nothing of this note, for it made Anna's conduct seem stranger than ever.
Opposite the page on which lay the little letter, Monsieur Wachner had amused himself by
     trying to imitate Anna's angular handwriting.
Sylvia tore out one of the blank pages, and then she put the note-book and its enclosure back
     on the table. She felt vaguely touched by the fact that the Wachners had kept her friend's last
     letter; they alone, so she reminded herself, had been really sorry and concerned at Anna's
     sudden departure from the place. They also, like Sylvia herself, had been pained that Madame
     Wolsky had not cared to say good-bye to them.
She scribbled a few lines on the scrap of paper, and then, quickly making her way to the
     dining-room, she placed her unconventional invitation on the round table, and went out into the
     hall.
As she opened the front door of the Châlet des Muguets Sylvia was met by a blast of hot air.
     She looked out dubiously. She was thoroughly unnerved—as she expressed it to herself, "upset."
     Feeling as she now felt, walking back through the heat would be intolerable.
For the first time Lacville became utterly distasteful to Sylvia Bailey. She asked herself,
     with a kind of surprise, of self-rebuke, why she was there—away from her own country and her
     own people? With a choking sensation in her throat she told herself that it would be very
     comfortable to see once more the tall, broad figure of Bill Chester, and to hear his good,
     gruff English voice again.
She stepped out of the house, and put up her white parasol.
It was still dreadfully hot, but to the left, across the lawn, lay the cool depths of the
     chestnut wood. Why not go over there and rest in the shade?
Hurrying across the scorched grass to the place where there was an opening in the rough
     hedge, she found herself, a moment later, plunged in the grateful green twilight created by
     high trees.
It was delightfully quiet and still in the wood, and Sylvia wondered vaguely why the Wachners
     never took their tea out there. But foreigners are very law-abiding, or so she supposed, and
     the wood, if a piece of no-man's land, was for sale. Up a path she could see the back of a
     large board.
It was clear that this pretty bit of woodland would have been turned into villa plots long
     ago had it been nearer to a road. But it was still a stretch of primeval forest. Here and
     there, amid the tufts of grass, lay the husks of last autumn's chestnuts.
Sylvia slowly followed the little zigzag way which cut across the wood, and then, desiring to
     sit down for awhile, she struck off to the right, towards a spot where she saw that the
     brambles and the undergrowth had been cleared away.
Even here, where in summer the sun never penetrated, the tufts of coarse grass were dried up
     by the heat. She glanced down; no, there was no fear that the hard, dry ground would stain her
     pretty cotton frock.
And then, as she sat there, Sylvia gradually became aware that close to her, where the
     undergrowth began again, the earth had recently been disturbed. Over an irregular patch of
     about a yard square the sods had been dug up, and then planted again.
The thought passed through her mind that children must have been playing there, and that they
     had made a rude attempt to destroy their handiwork, or rather to prevent its being noticed, by
     placing the branch of a tree across the little plot of ground where the earth had been
     disturbed. It was this broken branch, of which the leaves had shrivelled up, that had first
     drawn her attention to the fact that someone must have been there, and recently.
Her thoughts wandered off to Bill Chester. He was now actually journeying towards her as fast
     as boat and train could bring him; in a couple of hours he would be in Paris, and then,
     perhaps, he would come out to Lacville in time for dinner.
Sylvia had not been able to get a room for him in the Villa du Lac, but she had engaged one
     in the Pension Malfait—where she had been able to secure the apartment which had been occupied
     by Anna Wolsky, whose things had only just been moved out of it.
She could not help being sorry that Bill would see Lacville for the first time on a Sunday.
     She feared that, to his English eyes, the place, especially on that day, would present a
     peculiarly—well, disreputable appearance!
Sylvia felt jealous for the good fame of Lacville. Out in the open air her spirits had
     recovered their balance; she told herself that she had been very happy here—singularly,
     extraordinarily happy....
Of course it was a pity when people lost more money than they could afford at the Casino; but
     even in England people betted—the poor, so she had been told, risked all their spare pence on
     horse racing, and the others, those who could afford it, went to Monte Carlo, or stayed at home
     and played bridge!
After all, where was the difference? But, of course, Bill Chester, with his tiresome,
     old-fashioned views of life, would think there was a great difference; he would certainly
     disapprove of the way she was now spending her money....
Something told her, and the thought was not wholly unpleasing to her, that Bill Chester and
     the Comte de Virieu would not get on well together. She wondered if Count Paul had ever been
     jealous—if he were capable of jealousy? It would be rather interesting to see if anything or
     anyone could make him so!
And then her mind travelled on, far, far away, to a picture with which she had been familiar
     from her girlhood, for it hung in the drawing-room of one of her father's friends at Market
     Dalling. It was called "The Gambler's Wife." She had always thought it a very pretty and
     pathetic picture; but she no longer thought it so; in fact, it now appeared to her to be a
     ridiculous travesty of life. Gamblers were just like other people, neither better nor worse—and
     often infinitely more lovable than were some other people....
At last Sylvia got up, and slowly made her way out of the wood. She did not go back through
     the Wachners' garden; instead, she struck off to the left, on to a field path, which finally
     brought her to the main road.
As she was passing the Pension Malfait the landlady came out to the gate.
"Madame!" she cried out loudly, "I have had news of Madame Wolsky at last! Early this
     afternoon I had a telegram from her asking me to send her luggage to the cloak-room of the Gare
     du Nord."
Sylvia felt very glad—glad, and yet once more, perhaps unreasonably, hurt. Then Anna had been
     in Paris all the time? How odd, how really unkind of her not to have written and relieved the
     anxiety which she must have known her English friend would be feeling about her!
"I have had Madame Wolsky's room beautifully prepared for the English gentleman," went on
     Madame Malfait amiably. She was pleased that Mrs. Bailey was giving her a new guest, and it
     also amused her to observe what prudes Englishwomen could be.
Fancy putting a man who had come all the way from England to see one, in a pension situated
     at the other end of the town to where one was living oneself!
William Chester, solicitor, and respected citizen of Market Dalling, felt rather taken aback
     and bewildered as he joined the great stream of people who were pouring out of the large
     suburban station of Lacville.
He had only arrived in Paris two hours before, and after a hasty dinner at the Gare du Nord
     he had made inquiries as to his best way of reaching Lacville. And then he was told, to his
     surprise, that from the very station in which he found himself trains started every few minutes
     to the spot for which he was bound.
"To-night," added the man of whom he had inquired, "there is a fine fête at Lacville,
     including fireworks on the lake!"
Chester had imagined Sylvia to be staying in a quiet village or little country town. That was
     the impression her brief letters to him had conveyed, and he was astonished to hear that
     Lacville maintained so large and constant a train service.
Sylvia had written that she would engage a room for him at the boarding-house where she was
     staying; and Chester, who was very tired after his long, hot journey, looked forward to a
     pleasant little chat with her, followed by a good night's rest.
It was nine o'clock when he got into the Lacville train, and again he was vaguely surprised
     to see what a large number of people were bound for the place. It was clear that something
     special must be going on there to-night, and that "the fireworks on the lake" must be on a very
     splendid scale.
When he arrived at Lacville, he joined the great throng of people, who were laughing and
     talking, each and all in holiday mood, and hailed an open carriage outside the station. "To the
     Villa du Lac!" he cried.
The cab could only move slowly through the crowd of walkers, and when it finally emerged out
     of the narrow streets of the town it stopped a moment, as if the driver wished his English fare
     to gaze at the beautiful panorama spread out before his eyes.
Dotted over the lake, large and mysterious in the starlit night, floated innumerable tiny
     crafts, each gaily hung with a string of coloured lanterns. Now and again a red and blue rocket
     streamed up with a hiss, dissolving in a shower of stars reflected in the still water.
Down to the right a huge building, with towers and minarets flung up against the sky, was
     outlined in twinkling lights.
The cab moved on, only for a few yards however, and then drove quickly through high gates,
     and stopped with a jerk in front of a stone staircase.
"It cannot be here," said Chester incredulously to himself. "This looks more like a fine
     private house than a small country hotel."
"Villa du Lac?" he asked interrogatively, and the cabman said, "Oui, M'sieur."
The Englishman got out of the cab, and ascending the stone steps, rang the bell. The door
     opened, and a neat young woman stood before him.
"I am come to see Mrs. Bailey," he said in his slow, hesitating French.
There came a torrent of words, of smiles and nods—it seemed to Chester of excuses—in which
     "Madame Bailey" frequently occurred.
He shook his head, helplessly.
"I will call my uncle!"
The maid turned away; and Chester, with an agreeable feeling of relief that at last his
     journey was ended, took his bag off the cab, and dismissed the man.
What a delightful, spacious house! Sylvia had not been so very foolish after all.
M. Polperro came forward, bowing and smiling.
"M'sieur is the gentleman Madame Bailey has been expecting?" he said, rubbing his hands. "Oh,
     how sad she will be that she has already gone to the Casino! But Madame did wait for M'sieur
     till half-past nine; then she concluded that he must mean to spend the night in Paris."
"Do you mean that Mrs. Bailey has gone out?" asked Chester, surprised and disappointed.
"Yes, M'sieur. Madame has gone out, as she always does in the evening, to the Casino. It is,
     as M'sieur doubtless knows, the great attraction of our delightful and salubrious
     Lacville."
Chester had not much sense of humour, but he could not help smiling to himself at the other's
     pompous words.
"Perhaps you will kindly show me to the room which Mrs. Bailey has engaged for me," he said,
     "and then I will go out and try and find her."
M. Polperro burst into a torrent of agitated apologies. There was alas! no room for Madame
     Bailey's friend—in fact the Villa du Lac was so extraordinarily prosperous that there never was
     a room there from May till October, unless one of the guests left unexpectedly!
But Mr. Chester—was not that his name?—must not be cast down, for Mrs. Bailey had secured a
     beautiful room for him in another pension, a very inferior pension to the Villa du Lac, but
     still one in which he would be comfortable.
Chester now felt annoyed, and showed it. The thought of turning out again was not a pleasant
     one.
But what was this funny little Frenchman saying?
"Oh, if M'sieur had only arrived an hour ago! Madame Bailey was so terribly disappointed not
     to see M'sieur at dinner! A very nice special dinner was prepared, cooked by myself, in honour
     of Madame Bailey's little party."
And he went on to tell Chester, who was getting bewildered with the quick, eager talk, that
     this special dinner had been served at eight o'clock, and that Madame Bailey had entertained
     two friends that evening.
"You say that Mrs. Bailey is at the Casino?"
"Mais oui, M'sieur!"
It had never occurred to Chester that there would be a Casino in the place where Sylvia was
     spending the summer. But then everything at Lacville, including the Villa du Lac, was utterly
     unlike what the English lawyer had expected it to be.
M. Polperro spread out his hands with an eloquent gesture. "I beg of M'sieur," he said, "to
     allow me to conduct him to the Casino! Madame Bailey will not be here for some time, not
     perhaps for one hour, perhaps for two hours. I will have the luggage sent on to the Pension
     Malfait."
Strange—very strange! At home in Market Dalling Sylvia had always been fond of going to bed
     quite early; yet now, according to the hotel-keeper, she was perhaps going to stay out till one
     o'clock—till one o'clock on Sunday morning!
M. Polperro led Chester into the stately, long drawing-room; but in a very few moments he
     reappeared, having taken off his white apron and his chef's cap, and put on a light grey alpaca
     coat and a soft hat.
As they hurried along the path which skirts the lake, Chester began to feel the charm of the
     place. It was very gay and delightful—"very French," so the English lawyer told himself. The
     lake, too, looked beautiful—mysteriously beautiful and fairy-like, in the moonlight.
Soon they turned into a narrow dark lane.
"This is not a grand entrance to our beautiful Casino," said M. Polperro, ruefully, "but no
     matter, it is lovely once you get inside!" and he chuckled happily.
When in front of the great glass doors, he touched Chester on the arm.
"I wonder whether M'sieur would care to become a member of the Club," he said in a low voice.
     "I do not press M'sieur to do so! But you see, both Madame Bailey and her friends are members
     of the Club, and it is almost certain that it is there we shall find them. I fear it is no use
     our going to the Playing Rooms downstairs."
The Playing Rooms? Sylvia a member of a club? And—for Chester's quick, legal mind had leapt
     on the fact—of a gambling club?
No, that was incredible.
"I think there must be some mistake," he said distantly. "I do not think that Mrs. Bailey is
     a member of a club."
M. Polperro looked very much surprised.
"Oh, yes, indeed she is," he answered confidently. "It is only the quite common people who
     content themselves, M'sieur, with risking a franc and playing the little games. But just as
     M'sieur likes—" he shrugged his shoulders. "I do not press M'sieur to become a member of the
     Club."
Without answering, Chester paid the couple of francs admission for himself and his companion,
     and they walked slowly through the lower rooms, threading their way through the crowd.
"You see, M'sieur, I was right! Madame Bailey is in the Club!"
"Very well. Let us go to the Club," said Chester, impatiently.
He was beginning, or so he thought, to understand. The Club was evidently a quiet, select
     part of the Casino, with a reading room and so on. Sylvia had probably made friends with some
     French people in her hotel, and they had persuaded her to join the Club.
He was beginning to throw off his tiredness; the unaccustomed atmosphere in which he found
     himself amused and interested, even if it rather shocked him.
Ten minutes later he also, thanks to the kind offices of M. Polperro, and by the payment of
     twenty francs, found himself a member of the Club; free of that inner sanctuary where the
     devotees of the fickle goddess play with gold instead of silver; and where, as even Chester
     could see, the people who stood round the table, risking with quiet, calculating eyes their
     twenty-franc pieces and bank-notes, were of a very different social standing from the merry,
     careless crowd downstairs.
In the Baccarat Room most of the men were in evening clothes, and the women with them, if to
     Chester's eyes by no means desirable or reputable-looking companions, were young, pretty, and
     beautifully dressed.
Still, the English lawyer felt a thrill of disgust at the thought that Sylvia Bailey could
     possibly be part of such a company.
Baccarat was being played at both tables, but the crowd of players centred rather round one
     than the other, as is almost always the way.
M. Polperro touched his companion on the arm. "And now, M'sieur," he said briefly, "I will
     with your permission depart home. I think you will find Madame Bailey at that further
     table."
Chester shook the owner of the Villa du Lac cordially by the hand. The little man had been
     really kind and helpful. It was a pity there was no vacant room in his hotel.
He made his way to the further table, and gradually reached a point of vantage where he could
     see those of the players who were seated round the green cloth.
As is generally the case when really high play is going on, the people who were playing, as
     also those watching them, were curiously quiet.
And then, with a shock of surprise which sent the blood to his cheeks, Chester suddenly saw
     that Sylvia Bailey was sitting nearly opposite to where he himself was standing.
There are certain scenes, certain human groupings of individuals, which remain fixed for ever
     against the screen of memory. Bill Chester will never forget the sight which was presented to
     him in the Lacville Casino by the particular group on which his tired eyes became focussed with
     growing amazement and attention.
Sylvia was sitting at the baccarat table next to the man who was acting as Banker. She was
     evidently absorbed in the fortunes of the game, and she followed the slow falling of the
     fateful cards with rather feverish intentness.
Her small gloved hands rested on the table, one of them loosely holding a tiny ivory rake;
     and on a bank-note spread open on the green cloth before her were two neat piles of gold, the
     one composed of twenty-franc, the other of ten-franc pieces.
Chester, with a strange feeling of fear and anger clutching at his heart, told himself that
     he had never seen Sylvia look as she looked to-night. She was more than pretty—she was lovely,
     and above all, alive—vividly alive. There was a bright colour on her cheek, and a soft light
     shining in her eyes.
The row of pearls which had occasioned the only serious difference which had ever arisen
     between them, rose and fell softly on the bosom of her black lace dress.
Chester also gradually became aware that his beautiful friend and client formed a centre of
     attraction to those standing round the gambling-table. Both the men and the women stared at
     her, some enviously, but more with kindly admiration, for beauty is sure of its tribute in any
     French audience, and Sylvia Bailey to-night looked radiantly lovely—lovely and yet surely
     unhappy and ill-at-ease.
Well might she look both in such a place and among such a crew! So the English lawyer angrily
     told himself.
Now and again she turned and spoke in an eager, intimate fashion to a man sitting next her on
     her left. This man, oddly enough, was not playing.
Sylvia Bailey's companion was obviously a Frenchman, or so Chester felt sure, for now he
     found himself concentrating his attention on Mrs. Bailey's neighbour rather than on her. This
     man, to whom she kept turning and speaking in a low, earnest tone, was slim and fair, and what
     could be seen of his evening clothes fitted scrupulously well. The Englishman, looking at him
     with alien, jealous eyes, decided within himself that the Frenchman with whom Sylvia seemed to
     be on such friendly terms, was a foppish-looking fellow, not at all the sort of man she ought
     to have "picked up" on her travels.
Suddenly Sylvia raised her head, throwing it back with a graceful gesture, and Chester's eyes
     travelled on to the person who was standing just behind her, and to whom she had now begun
     speaking with smiling animation.
This was a woman—short, stout, and swarthy—dressed in a bright purple gown, and wearing a
     pale blue bonnet which was singularly unbecoming to her red, massive face. Chester rather
     wondered that such an odd, and yes—such a respectable-looking person could be a member of this
     gambling club. She reminded him of the stout old housekeeper in a big English country house
     near Market Dalling.
Sylvia seemed also to include in her talk a man who was standing next the fat woman. He was
     tall and lanky, absurdly and unsuitably dressed, to the English onlooker, in a white alpaca
     suit and a shabby Panama hat. In his hand he held a little book, in which he noted down every
     turn of the game, and it was clear to Chester that, though he listened to Mrs. Bailey with
     civility, he was quite uninterested in what she was saying.
Very different was the attitude of the woman; she seemed absorbed in Sylvia's remarks, and
     she leant forward familiarly, throwing all her weight on the back of the chair on which Mrs.
     Bailey was sitting. Sometimes as she spoke she smiled in a way that showed her large, strong
     teeth.
Chester thought them both odd, common-looking people. He was surprised that Sylvia knew
     them—nay more, that she seemed on such friendly terms with them; and he noticed that the
     Frenchman sitting next to her—the dandyish-looking fellow to whom she had been talking just
     now—took no part at all in her present conversation. Once, indeed, he looked up and frowned, as
     if the chatter going on between Mrs. Bailey and her fat friend fretted and disturbed him.
Play had again begun in earnest, and Sylvia turned her attention to the table. Her neighbour
     whispered something which at once caused her to take up two napoleons and a ten-franc piece
     from the pile of gold in front of her. Very deliberately she placed the coins within the
     ruled-off space reserved for the stakes.
Bill Chester, staring across at her, felt as if he were in a nightmare—gazing at something
     which was not real, and which would vanish if looked at long enough.
Could that lovely young woman, who sat there, looking so much at home, with the little rake
     in her hand be Sylvia Bailey, the quiet young widow whose perfect propriety of conduct had
     always earned the praise of those matrons of Market Dalling, whom Chester's own giddier sisters
     called by the irreverent name of "old cats"? It was fortunate that none of these respectable
     ladies could see Sylvia now!
To those who regard gambling as justifiable, provided the gambler's means allow of it, even
     to those who habitually see women indulging in games of chance, there will, of course, be
     something absurd in the point of view of the solicitor. But to such a man as Bill Chester, the
     sight of the woman for whom he had always felt a very sincere respect, as well as a far more
     enduring and jealous affection than he quite realised, sitting there at a public gaming table,
     was a staggering—nay, a disgusting—spectacle.
He reminded himself angrily that Sylvia had a good income—so good an income that she very
     seldom spent it all in the course of any one year. Why, therefore, should she wish to increase
     it?
Above all, how could she bear to mingle with this queer, horrid crowd? Why should she allow
     herself to be contaminated by breathing the same air as some of the women who were there round
     her? She and the stout, middle-aged person standing behind her were probably the only
     "respectable" women in the Club.
And then, it was all so deliberate! Chester had once seen a man whom he greatly respected
     drunk, and the sight had ever remained with him. But, after all, a man may get drunk by
     accident—nay, it may almost be said that a man always gets drunk by accident. But, in this
     matter of risking her money at the baccarat table, Sylvia Bailey knew very well what she was
     about.
With a thrill of genuine distress the lawyer asked himself whether she had not, in very
     truth, already become a confirmed gambler. It was with an assured, familiar gesture that Sylvia
     placed her money on the green cloth, and then with what intelligent knowledge she followed the
     operations of the Banker!
He watched her when her fifty francs were swept away, and noted the calm manner with which
     she immediately took five louis from her pile, and pushed them, with her little rake, well on
     to the table.
But before the dealer of the cards had spoken the fateful words: "Le jeu est fait. Rien
      ne va plus!" Mrs. Bailey uttered an exclamation under her breath, and hurriedly rose from
     her chair.
She had suddenly seen Chester—seen his eyes fixed on her with a perplexed, angry look in
     them, and the look had made her wince.
Forgetting that she still had a stake on the green cloth, she turned away from the table and
     began making her way round the edge of the circle.
For a moment Chester lost sight of her—there were so many people round the table. He went on
     staring, hardly knowing what he was doing, at the four pounds she had left on the green
     cloth.
The cards were quickly dealt, and the fateful, to Chester the incomprehensible, words were
     quickly uttered. Chester saw that Sylvia, unknowing of the fact, had won—that five louis were
     added to her original stake. The fair-haired Frenchman in evening dress by whom Mrs. Bailey had
     been sitting looked round; not seeing her, he himself swept up the stake and slipped the ten
     louis into his pocket.
"Bill! You here? I had quite given you up! I thought you had missed the train—at any rate, I
     never thought you would come out to Lacville as late as this."
The bright colour, which was one of Sylvia's chief physical attributes, had faded from her
     cheeks. She looked pale, and her heart was beating uncomfortably. She would have given almost
     anything in the world for Bill Chester not to have come down to the Club and caught her like
     this—"caught" was the expression poor Sylvia used to herself.
"I am so sorry," she went on, breathlessly, "so very sorry! What a wretch you must have
     thought me! But I have got you such a nice room in a pension where a friend of mine was for a
     time. I couldn't get you anything at the Villa du Lac. But you can have all your meals with me
     there. It's such good cooking, and there's a lovely garden, Bill—"
Chester said nothing. He was still looking at her, trying to readjust his old ideas and
     ideals of Sylvia Bailey to her present environment.
Sylvia suddenly grew very red. After all, Bill Chester was not her keeper! He had no right to
     look as angry, as—as disgusted as he was now doing.
Then there came to both a welcome diversion.
"Ma jolie Sylvie! Will you not introduce me to your friend?"
Madame Wachner had elbowed her way through the crowd to where Chester and Mrs. Bailey were
     standing. Her husband lagged a little way behind, his eyes still following the play. Indeed,
     even as his wife spoke L'Ami Fritz made a note in the little book he held in his hand. When in
     the Baccarat Room he was absolutely absorbed in the play going on. Nothing could really
     distract him from it.
Sylvia felt and looked relieved.
"Oh, Bill," she exclaimed, "let me introduce you to Madame Wachner? She has been very kind to
     me since I came to Lacville."
"I am enchanted to meet you, sir. We 'oped to see you at dinner."
Chester bowed. She had a pleasant voice, this friend of Sylvia's, and she spoke English well,
     even if she did drop her aitches!
"It is getting rather late"—Chester turned to Sylvia, but he spoke quite pleasantly.
"Yes, we must be going; are you staying on?" Sylvia was addressing the woman she had just
     introduced to Chester, but her eyes were wandering towards the gambling table. Perhaps she had
     suddenly remembered her five louis.
Chester smiled a little grimly to himself. He wondered if Sylvia would be surprised to hear
     that her neighbour, the fair Frenchman to whom she had been talking so familiarly, had
     "collared" her stakes and her winnings.
"No, indeed! We, too, must be going 'ome. Come, Fritz, it is getting late." The devoted wife
     spoke rather crossly. They all four turned, and slowly walked down the room.
Sylvia instinctively fell behind, keeping step with Monsieur Wachner, while Chester and
     Madame Wachner walked in front.
The latter had already taken the measure of the quiet, stolid-looking Englishman. She had
     seen him long before Sylvia had done so, and had watched him with some attention, guessing
     almost at once that he must be the man for whom Mrs. Bailey had waited dinner.
"I suppose that this is your first visit to Lacville?" she observed smiling. "Very few of
     your countrymen come 'ere, sir, but it is an interesting and curious place—more really curious
     than is Monte Carlo."
She lowered her voice a little, but Chester heard her next words very clearly.
"It is not a proper place for our pretty friend, but—ah! she loves play now! The Polish lady,
     Madame Wolsky, was also a great lover of baccarat; but now she 'as gone away. And so, when Mrs.
     Bailey come 'ere, like this, at night, my 'usband and I—we are what you English people call
     old-fashioned folk—we come, too. Not to play—oh, no, but, you understand, just to look
     after 'er. She is so innocent, so young, so beautiful!"
Chester looked kindly at Madame Wachner. It was very decent of her—really good-natured and
     motherly—to take such an interest in poor Sylvia and her delinquencies. Yes, that was the way
     to take this—this matter which so shocked him. Sylvia Bailey—lovely, wilful, spoilt Sylvia—was
     a very young woman, and ridiculously innocent, as this old lady truly said.
He, Chester, knew that a great many nice people went to Monte Carlo, and spent sometimes a
     good deal more money than they could afford at the tables. It was absurd to be angry with
     Sylvia for doing here what very many other people did in another place. He felt sincerely
     grateful to this fat, vulgar looking woman for having put the case so clearly.
"It's very good of you to do that," he answered awkwardly; "I mean it's very good of you to
     accompany Mrs. Bailey to this place," he looked round him with distaste.
They were now downstairs, part of a merry, jostling crowd, which contained, as all such
     crowds naturally contain, a rather rowdy element. "It certainly is no place for Mrs. Bailey to
     come to by herself—"
He was going to add something, when Sylvia walked forward.
"Where's Count Paul?" she asked, anxiously, of Madame Wachner. "Surely he did not stay on at
     the table after we left?"
Madame Wachner shook her head slightly.
"I don't know at all," she said, and then cast a meaning glance at Chester. It was an odd
     look, and somehow it inspired him with a prejudice against the person, this "Count Paul," of
     whom Sylvia had just spoken.
"Ah, here he is!" There was relief, nay gladness, ringing in Mrs. Bailey's frank voice.
The Comte de Virieu was pushing his way through the slowly moving crowd. Without looking at
     the Wachners, he placed ten louis in Sylvia's hand.
"Your last stake was doubled," he said, briefly. "Then that means, does it not, Madame, that
     you have made thirty-two louis this evening? I congratulate you."
Chester's prejudice grew, unreasonably. "Damn the fellow; then he was honest, after all! But
     why should he congratulate Mrs. Bailey on having won thirty-two louis?"
He acknowledged Sylvia's introduction of the Count very stiffly, and he was relieved when the
     other turned on his heel—relieved, and yet puzzled to see how surprised Sylvia seemed to be by
     his departure. She actually tried to keep the Count from going back to the Club.
"Aren't you coming to the Villa du Lac? It's getting very late," she said, in a tone of deep
     disappointment.
But he, bowing, answered, "No, Madame; it is impossible." He waited a moment, then muttered,
     "I have promised to take the Bank in a quarter of an hour."
Sylvia turned away. Tears had sprung to her eyes. But Chester saw nothing of her agitation,
     and a moment later they were all four out in the kindly darkness.
Even to Chester there was something grateful in the sudden stillness in which he and the
     three others found themselves on leaving the Casino.
"Not a very safe issue out of a place where people carry about such a lot of money!" he
     exclaimed, as they made their way up the rough little lane. "One could half-throttle anyone
     here, and have a very good chance of getting off!"
"Oh, Lacville is a very safe place!" answered Madame Wachner, laughing her jovial laugh.
     "Still, considering all the money made by the Casino, it is too bad they 'aven't made a more
     splendid—what do you call it—?"
"—Approach," said L'Ami Fritz, in his deep voice, and Chester turned, rather surprised. It
     was the first word he had heard Monsieur Wachner utter.
Sylvia was trying hard to forget Count Paul and his broken promise, and to be her natural
     self.
As they emerged into the better-lighted thoroughfare, where stood a row of carriages, she
     said, "I will drive with you to the Pension Malfait, Bill."
Madame Wachner officiously struck in, "Do not think of driving your friend to the Pension
     Malfait, dear friend! We will gladly leave Mr. Chester there. But if 'e does not mind we will
     walk there; it is too fine a night for driving."
"But how about your luggage?" said Sylvia, anxiously. "Has your luggage gone on to the
     Pension?"
"Yes," said Chester, shortly. "Your landlord very kindly said he would see to its being sent
     on."
They were now close to the Villa du Lac. "Of course, I shall expect you to lunch to-morrow,"
     said Sylvia. "Twelve o'clock is the time. You'll want a good rest after your long day."
And then Chester started off with his two strange companions. How very unlike this evening
     had been to what he had pictured it would be! Years before, as a boy, he had spent a week at a
     primitive seaside hotel near Dieppe. He had thought Lacville would be like that. He had
     imagined himself arriving at a quiet, rural, little country inn, and had seen himself kindly,
     if a little shyly, welcomed by Sylvia. He could almost have laughed at the contrast between the
     place his fancy had painted and the place he had found, at what he had thought would happen,
     and at what had happened!
As they trudged along, Chester, glancing to his right, saw that there were still a great many
     boats floating on the lake. Did Lacville folk never go to bed?
"Yes," said Madame Wachner, quickly divining his thoughts, "some of the people 'ere—why, they
     stay out on the water all night! Then they catch the early train back to Paris in the morning,
     and go and work all day. Ah, yes, it is indeed a splendid thing to be young!"
She sighed, a long, sentimental sigh, and looked across, affectionately, at L'Ami Fritz.
"I do not feel my youth to be so very far away," she said. "But then, the people in my dear
     country are not cynical as are the French!"
Her husband strode forward in gloomy silence, probably thinking over the money he might have
     made or lost had he played that evening, instead of only noting down the turns of the game.
Madame Wachner babbled on, making conversation for Chester.
She was trying to find out something more about this quiet Englishman. Why had he come to
     Lacville? How long was he going to stay here? What was his real relation to Sylvia Bailey?
Those were the questions that the pretty English widow's new friend was asking herself,
     finding answers thereto which were unsatisfactory, because vague and mysterious.
At last she ventured a direct query.
"Are you going to stay long in this beautiful place, Monsieur?"
"I don't know," said Chester shortly. "I don't suppose I shall stay very long. I'm going on
     to Switzerland. How long I stay will a little bit depend on Mrs. Bailey's plans. I haven't had
     time to ask her anything yet. What sort of a place is the Villa du Lac?"
He asked the question abruptly; he was already full of dislike and suspicion of everything,
     though not of everybody, at Lacville. These Wachners were certainly nice, simple people.
"Oh, the Villa du Lac is a very respectable 'ouse," said Madame Wachner cautiously. "It is
     full of respectable—what do you call them?—dowagers. Oh, you need have no fear for your friend,
     sir; she is quite safe there. And you know she does not often go to the Casino"—she told the
     lie with bold deliberation. Some instinct told her that while Chester was at Lacville Sylvia
     would not go to the Casino as often as she had been in the habit of doing.
There was a pause—and then again Madame Wachner asked the Englishman a question:
"Perhaps you will go on to Switzerland, leaving Mrs. Bailey here, and then come back for
     her?"
"Perhaps I shall," he said heavily, without really thinking of what he was saying.
They were now walking along broad, shady roads which reminded him of those in a well-kept
     London suburb. Not a sound issued from any of the houses which stood in gardens on either side,
     and in the moonlight he saw that they were all closely shuttered. It might almost have been a
     little township of empty houses.
Again the thought crossed his mind what a dangerous place these lonely roads might be to a
     man carrying a lot of gold and notes on his person. They had not met a single policeman, or,
     indeed, anyone, after they had left the side of the lake.
At last Madame Wachner stopped short before a large wooden door.
'"Ere we are!" she said briskly. "I presume they are expecting you, sir? If they are not
     expecting you, they will probably 'ave all gone to bed. So we will wait, will we not, Ami
     Fritz, and see this gentleman safe in? If the worst came to the worst, you could come with us
     to our villa and sleep there the night."
"You are awfully kind!" said Chester heartily—and, indeed, he did feel this entire stranger's
     kindness exceptional.
How fortunate that Sylvia had come across such a nice, simple, kindly woman in such a queer
     place as Lacville!
But Madame Wachner's good-natured proposal had never to be seriously considered, for when her
     vigorous hand found and pulled the bell there came sounds in the courtyard beyond, and a moment
     later the door swung open.
"Who's there?" cried M. Malfait in a loud voice.
"It is the English gentleman, Mrs. Bailey's friend," said Madame Wachner quickly; and at once
     the Frenchman's voice softened.
"Ah! we had quite given up M'sieur," he said amiably. "Come in, come in! Yes, the bag has
     arrived; but people often send their luggage before they come themselves. Just as they
     sometimes leave their luggage after they themselves have departed!"
Chester was shaking hands cordially with the Wachners.
"Thank you for all your kindness," he said heartily. "I hope we shall meet again soon! I
     shall certainly be here for some days. Perhaps you will allow me to call on you?"
Once the good-natured couple had walked off arm in arm into the night, the door of the
     Pension Malfait was locked and barred, and Chester followed his landlord into the long, dark
     house.
"One has to be careful. There are so many queer characters about," said M. Malfait; and then,
     "Will M'sieur have something to eat? A little refreshment, a bottle of lemonade, or of pale
     ale? We have splendid Bass's ale," he said, solicitously.
But the Englishman shook his head, smiling. "Oh, no," he said slowly, in his bad French, "I
     dined in Paris. All I need now is a good night's rest."
"And that M'sieur will certainly have," said the landlord civilly. "Lacville is famous for
     its sleep-producing qualities. That is why so many Parisians content themselves with coming
     here instead of going further afield."
They were walking through the lower part of the house, and then suddenly M. Malfait
     exclaimed, "I was forgetting the bath-room! I know how important to English gentlemen the
     bath-room is!"
The pleasant vista of a good hot bath floated before Chester's weary brain and body. Really
     the house was not as primitive as he had thought it when he had seen the landlord come forward
     with a candle.
M. Malfait turned round and flung open a door.
"It was an idea of my wife's," he said proudly. "You see, M'sieur, the apartment serves a
     double purpose—"
And it did! For the odd little room into which Chester was shown by his host served as store
     cupboard as well as bath-room. It was lined with shelves on which stood serried rows of pots of
     home-made jam, jars of oil and vinegar, and huge tins of rice, vermicelli, and tapioca, in a
     corner a round zinc basin—but a basin of Brobdignagian size—stood under a cold water tap.
"The bath is for those of our visitors who do not follow the regular hydropathic treatment
     for which Lacville is still famous," said the landlord pompously. "But I must ask M'sieur not
     to fill the bath too full, for it is a great affair to empty it!"
He shut the door carefully, and led the way upstairs.
"Here we are," he whispered at last. "I hope M'sieur will be satisfied. This is a room which
     was occupied by a charming Polish lady, Madame Wolsky, who was a friend of M'sieur's friend,
     Madame Bailey. But she left suddenly a week ago, and so we have the room at M'sieur's
     disposal."
He put the candle down, and bowed himself out of the room.
Chester looked round the large, bare sleeping chamber in which he found himself with the
     agreeable feeling that his long, hot, exciting day was now at an end.
Yes, it was a pleasant room—bare, and yet furnished with everything essential to comfort.
     Thus there was a good big, roomy arm-chair, a writing-table, and a clock, of which the hands
     now pointed to a quarter to one o'clock.
The broad, low bed, pushed back into an alcove as is the French fashion, looked delightfully
     cool and inviting by the light of his one candle.
When M. Malfait had shown him into the room the window was wide open to the hot, starless
     night, but the landlord, though he had left the window open, had drawn the thick curtains
     across it. That was all right; Chester had no wish to be wakened at five in the morning by the
     sunlight streaming into the room. He meant to have a really long rest. He was too tired to
     think—too tired to do anything but turn in.
And then an odd thing happened. Chester's brain was so thoroughly awake, he had become so
     over-excited, that he could not, try as he might, fall asleep.
He lay awake tossing about hour after hour. And then, when at last he did fall into a heavy,
     troubled slumber, he was disturbed by extraordinary and unpleasant dreams—nightmares in which
     Sylvia Bailey seemed to play a part.
At last he roused himself and pulled back the curtains from across the window. It was already
     dawn, but he thought the cool morning air might induce sleep, and for a while, lying on his
     side away from the light, he did doze lightly.
Quite suddenly he was awakened by the sensation, nay, the knowledge, that there was someone
     in the room! So vivid was this feeling of unwished-for companionship that he got up and looked
     in the shadowed recess of the alcove in which stood his bed; but, of course, there was no one
     there. In fact there would not have been space there for any grown-up person to squeeze
     into.
He told himself that what he had heard—if he had heard anything—was someone bringing him his
     coffee and rolls, and that the servant had probably been trying to attract his attention, for,
     following his prudent custom, he had locked his door the night before.
He unlocked the door and looked out, staring this way and that along the empty passage. But
     no, in spite of the now-risen sun, it was still early morning; the Pension Malfait was sunk in
     sleep.
Chester went back to bed. He felt tired, disturbed, uneasy; sleep was out of the question; so
     he lay back, and with widely-open eyes, began to think of Sylvia Bailey and of the strange
     events of the night before.
He lived again the long hour he had spent at the Casino. He could almost smell the odd,
     sweet, stuffy smell of the Baccarat Room, and there rose before him its queer, varied inmates.
     He visioned distinctly Sylvia Bailey as he had suddenly seen her, sitting before the green
     cloth, with her money piled up before her, and a look of eager interest and absorption on her
     face.
There had always been in Sylvia something a little rebellious, a touch of individuality which
     made her unlike the other women he knew, and which fascinated and attracted him. She was a
     woman who generally knew her own mind, and who had her own ideas of right and wrong. Lying
     there, he remembered how determined she had been about those pearls....
Chester's thoughts took a softer turn. How very, very pretty she had looked last evening—more
     than pretty—lovelier than he had ever seen her. There seemed to be new depths in her blue
     eyes.
But Chester was shrewd enough to know that Sylvia had felt ashamed to be caught by him
     gambling—gambling, too, in such very mixed company. Well, she would soon be leaving Lacville!
     What a pity those friends of hers had given up their Swiss holiday! It would have been so jolly
     if they could have gone on there together.
He got tired of lying in bed. What a long night, as well as a very short night, it had been!
     He rose and made his way down to the primitive bath-room. It would be delightful to have any
     sort of bath, and the huge zinc basin had its points—
As Chester went quickly back to his room, instead of feeling refreshed after his bath, he
     again experienced the disagreeable sensation that he was not alone. This time he felt as if he
     were being accompanied by an invisible presence. It was a very extraordinary and a most
     unpleasant feeling, one which Chester had never experienced before, and it made him
     afraid—afraid he knew not of what.
Being the manner of man he was, he began to think that he must be ill—that there must be
     something the matter with his nerves. Had he been at home, in Market Dalling, he would have
     gone to a doctor without loss of time.
Long afterwards, when people used to speak before him of haunted houses, Bill Chester would
     remember the Pension Malfait and the extraordinary sensations he had experienced
     there—sensations the more extraordinary that there was nothing to account for them.
But Chester never told anyone of his experiences, and indeed there was nothing to tell. He
     never saw anything, he never even heard anything, but now and again, especially when he was
     lying awake at night and in the early morning, the lawyer felt as if some other entity was
     struggling to communicate with him and could not do so....
The whole time he was there—and he stayed on at Lacville, as we shall see, rather longer than
     he at first intended—Chester never felt, when in his room at the Pension Malfait really alone,
     and sometimes the impression became almost intolerably vivid.
But the longest night, the most haunted night, and Chester's night had indeed been haunted,
     comes to an end at last. After he had had another bath and a good breakfast he felt a very
     different man to what he had done three or four hours ago, lying awake in the sinister,
     companioned atmosphere of his bed-room at the Pension Malfait.
Telling his courteous landlord that he would not be in to luncheon, Chester left the house,
     and as it was still far too early to seek out Sylvia, he struck out, with the aid of the little
     pocket-map of the environs of Paris with which he had been careful to provide himself, towards
     the open country.
And as he swung quickly along, feeling once more tired and depressed, the Englishman wondered
     more and more why Sylvia Bailey cared to stay in such a place as Lacville. It struck him as
     neither town nor country—more like an unfinished suburb than anything else, with almost every
     piece of spare land up for sale.
He walked on and on till at last he came to the edge of a great stretch of what looked like
     primeval woodland. This surely must be part of the famous Forest of Montmorency, which his
     guide-book mentioned as being the great attraction of Lacville? He wondered cynically whether
     Sylvia had ever been so far, and then he plunged into the wood, along one of the ordered alleys
     which to his English eyes looked so little forest-like, and yet which made walking there very
     pleasant.
Suddenly there fell on his ear the sound of horses trotting quickly. He looked round, and
     some hundred yards or so to his right, at a place where four roads met under high arching
     trees, he saw two riders, a man and a woman, pass by. They had checked their horses to a walk,
     and as their voices floated over to him, the woman's voice seemed extraordinarily, almost
     absurdly, familiar—in fact, he could have sworn it was Sylvia Bailey's voice.
Chester stopped in his walk and shrugged his shoulders impatiently. She must indeed be
     dwelling in his thoughts if he thus involuntarily evoked her presence where she could by no
     stretch of possibility be.
But that wandering echo brought Sylvia Bailey very near to Chester, and once more he recalled
     her as he had seen her sitting at the gambling table the night before.
In grotesque juxtaposition he remembered, together with that picture of Sylvia as he had seen
     her last night, the case of a respectable old lady, named Mrs. Meeks, the widow of a clergyman
     who had had a living in the vicinity of Market Dalling.
Not long after her husband's death this old lady—she had about three hundred a year, and
     Chester had charge of her money matters—went abroad for a few weeks to Mentone. Those few weeks
     had turned Mrs. Meeks into a confirmed gambler. She now lived entirely at Monte Carlo in one
     small room.
He could not help remembering now the kind of remarks that were made by the more prosperous
     inhabitants of Market Dalling, his fellow citizens, when they went off for a short holiday to
     the South, in January or February. They would see this poor lady, this Mrs. Meeks, wandering
     round the gaming tables, and the sight would amuse and shock them. Chester knew that one of the
     first things said to him after the return of such people would be, "Who d'you think I saw at
     Monte Carlo? Why, Mrs. Meeks, of course! It's enough to make her husband turn in his
     grave."
And now he told himself ruefully that it would be enough to make honest George Bailey turn in
     his grave could he see his pretty, sheltered Sylvia sitting in the Casino at Lacville,
     surrounded by the riffraff collected there last night, and actually taking an active part in
     the game as well as risking her money with business-like intentness.
He wondered if he could persuade Sylvia to leave Lacville soon. In any case he would himself
     stay on here three or four days—he had meant only to stay twenty-four hours, for he was on his
     way to join a friend whose Swiss holiday was limited. The sensible thing for Sylvia to do would
     be to go back to England.
Chester reached the Villa du Lac at half-past eleven and as he went out into the charming
     garden where he was told he would find Mrs. Bailey he told himself that Lacville was not
     without some innocent attractions. But Mrs. Bailey was not alone in this lovely garden. Sitting
     on the lawn by her was the Frenchman who had been with her when Chester had first caught sight
     of her at the Casino the night before.
The two were talking so earnestly that they only became aware of his approach when he was
     close to them, and though Chester was not a particularly observant man, he had an instant and
     most unpleasant impression that he had come too soon; that Sylvia was not glad to see him; and
     that the Frenchman was actually annoyed, even angered, by his sudden appearance.
"We might begin lunch a little earlier than twelve o'clock," said Sylvia, getting up. "They
     serve lunch from half-past eleven, do they not?" she turned to the Comte de Virieu.
"Yes, Madame, that is so," he said; and then he added, bowing, "And now perhaps I should say
     good-bye. I am going into Paris, as you know, early this afternoon, and then to Brittany. I
     shall be away two nights."
"You will remember me to your sister, to—to the Duchesse," faltered Sylvia.
Chester looked at her sharply. This Frenchman's sister? The Duchesse?—how very intimate
     Sylvia seemed to be with the fellow!
As the Count turned and sauntered back to the house she said rather breathlessly,
"The Comte de Virieu has been very kind to me, Bill. He took me into Paris to see his sister;
     she is the Duchesse d'Eglemont. You will remember that the Duc d'Eglemont won the Derby two
     years ago?"
And as he made no answer she went on, as if on the defensive.
"The Comte de Virieu has to go away to the funeral of his godmother. I am sorry, for I should
     have liked you to have become friends with him. He was at school in England—that is why he
     speaks English so well."
While they were enjoying the excellent luncheon prepared for them by M. Polperro, Chester was
     uncomfortably aware that the Count, sitting at his solitary meal at another table, could,
     should he care to do so, overhear every word the other two were saying.
But Paul de Virieu did not look across or talk as an Englishman would probably have done had
     he been on familiar terms with a fellow-guest in an hotel. Instead he devoted himself, in the
     intervals of the meal, to reading a paper. But now and again Chester, glancing across, could
     see the other man's eyes fixed on himself with a penetrating, thoughtful look. What did this
     Frenchman mean by staring at him like that?
As for Sylvia, she was obviously ill at ease. She talked quickly, rather disconnectedly, of
     the many things appertaining to her life at home, in Market Dalling, which she had in common
     with the English lawyer. She only touched on the delightful time she had had in Paris, and she
     said nothing of Lacville.
Long before the others had finished, Count Paul got up; before leaving the dining-room, he
     turned and bowed ceremoniously to Sylvia and her companion. With his disappearance it seemed to
     Chester that Sylvia at once became her natural, simple, eager, happy self. She talked less, she
     listened more, and at last Chester began to enjoy his holiday.
They went out again into the garden, and the wide lawn, with its shaded spaces of deep green,
     was a delicious place in which to spend a quiet, idle hour. They sat down and drank their
     coffee under one of the cedars of Lebanon.
"This is a very delightful, curious kind of hotel," he said at last. "And I confess that now
     I understand why you like Lacville. But I do wonder a little, Sylvia"—he looked at her
     gravely—"that you enjoy going to that Casino."
"You see, there's so very little else to do here!" she exclaimed, deprecatingly. "And then,
     after all, Bill, I don't see what harm there is in risking one's money if one can afford to do
     so!"
He shook his head at her—playfully, but seriously too. "Don't you?" he asked dryly.
"Why, there's Madame Wachner," said Sylvia suddenly, and Chester thought there was a little
     touch of relief in her voice.
"Madame Wachner?" And then the Englishman, gazing at the stout, squat figure which was
     waddling along the grass towards them, remembered.
This was the good lady who had been so kind to him the night before; nay, who had actually
     offered to give him a bed if the Pension Malfait had been closed.
"We 'ave lunched in the town," she said, partly addressing Chester, "and so I thought I would
     come and ask you, Madame Sylvia, whether you and your friend will come to tea at the Villa des
     Muguets to-day?" She fixed her bright little eyes on Sylvia's face.
Sylvia looked at Chester; she was smiling; he thought she would like him to accept.
"That is very kind of you," he said cordially.
Sylvia nodded her head gaily: "You are more than kind, dear Madame Wachner," she exclaimed.
     "We shall be delighted to come! I thought of taking Mr. Chester a drive through the Forest of
     Montmorency. Will it do if we are with you about five?"
"Yes," said Madame Wachner.
And then, to Chester's satisfaction, she turned and went away. "I cannot stay now," she said,
     "for l'Ami Fritz is waiting for me. 'E does not like to be kept waiting."
"What a nice woman!" said Chester heartily, "and how lucky you are, Sylvia, to have made her
     acquaintance in such a queer place as this. But I suppose you have got to know quite a number
     of people in the hotel?"
"Well, no—," she stopped abruptly. She certainly had come to know the Comte de Virieu, but he
     was the exception, not the rule.
"You see, Bill, Lacville is the sort of place where everyone thinks everyone else rather
     queer! I fancy some of the ladies here—they are mostly foreigners, Russians, and Germans—think
     it very odd that I should be by myself in such a place."
She spoke without thinking—in fact she uttered her thoughts aloud.
"Then you admit that it is rather a queer place for you to be staying in by
     yourself," he said slowly.
"No, I don't!" she protested eagerly. "But don't let's talk of disagreeable things—I'm going
     to take you such a splendid drive!"
Chester never forgot that first day of his at Lacville. It was by far the pleasantest day he
     spent there, and Sylvia Bailey, woman-like, managed entirely to conceal from him that she was
     not as pleased with their expedition as was her companion.
Thanks to M. Polperro's good offices, they managed to hire a really good motor; and once
     clear of the fantastic little houses and the waste ground which was all up for sale, how
     old-world and beautiful were the little hamlets, the remote stretches of woodland and the quiet
     country towns through which they sped!
On their way back, something said by Sylvia surprised and disturbed Chester very much. She
     had meant to conceal the fact that she was riding with Paul de Virieu each morning, but it is
     very difficult for one accustomed always to tell the truth to use deceit. And suddenly a
     careless word revealed to Chester that the horsewoman whose voice had sounded so oddly familiar
     to him in the Forest that morning had really been Sylvia herself!
He turned on her quickly: "Then do you ride every morning with this Frenchman?" he asked
     quietly.
"Almost every morning," she answered. "His sister lent me a horse and a riding habit. It was
     very kind of her," she raised her voice, and blushed deeply in the rushing wind.
Chester felt his mind suddenly fill with angry suspicion. Was it possible that this Comte de
     Virieu, this man of whom that nice Madame Wachner had spoken with such scorn as a confirmed
     gambler, was "making up" to Sylvia? It was a monstrous idea—but Chester, being a solicitor,
     knew only too well that in the matter of marriage the most monstrous and disastrous things are
     not only always possible but sometimes probable. Chester believed that all Frenchmen regard
     marriage as a matter of business. To such a man as this Count, Mrs. Bailey's fortune would be a
     godsend.
"Sylvia!" he exclaimed, in a low, stern voice.
He turned round and looked at her. She was staring straight before her; the colour had faded
     from her cheek; she looked pale and tired.
"Sylvia!" he repeated. "Listen to me, and—and don't be offended."
She glanced quickly at the man sitting by her side. His voice was charged with emotion, with
     anger.
"Don't be angry with me," he repeated. "If my suspicion, my fear, is unfounded, I beg your
     pardon with all my heart."
Sylvia got up and touched the driver on the shoulder. "Please slow down," she said in French,
     "we are going faster than I like."
Then she sank back in her seat. "Yes, Bill! What is it you wish to ask me? I couldn't hear
     you properly. We were going too fast."
"Is it possible, is it conceivable, that you are thinking of marrying this Frenchman?"
"No," said Sylvia, very quietly, "I am not thinking of marrying the Comte de Virieu. But he
     is my friend. I—I like and respect him. No, Bill, you need not fear that the Comte de Virieu
     will ever ask me to become his wife."
"But if he did?" asked Chester, hoarsely.
"You have no right to ask me such a question," she answered, passionately; and then, after a
     pause, she added, in a low voice: "But if he did, I should say no, Bill."
Her eyes were full of tears. As for Chester, he felt a variety of conflicting emotions, of
     which perhaps the strongest was a determination that if he could not get her no one else should
     do so. This—this damned French gambler had touched Sylvia's kind heart. Surely she couldn't
     care for a man she had only known a month, and such an affected, dandified fellow, too?
It was with relief that they both became aware a few moments later that they were on the
     outskirts of Lacville.
"Here is the Châlet des Muguets!" exclaimed Sylvia. "Isn't it a funny little place?"
The English lawyer stared at the bright pink building; with curiosity and amusement. It was
     indeed a funny little place, this brick-built bungalow, so fantastically and, to his British
     eyes, so ridiculously decorated with blue china lozenges, on which were painted giant lilies of
     the valley.
But he had not long to look, for as the car drew up before the white gate Madame Wachner's
     short, broad figure came hurrying down the path.
She opened the gate, and with boisterous heartiness welcomed Chester and Sylvia into the
     neglected garden.
Chester looked round him with an involuntary surprise. The Wachners' home was entirely unlike
     what he had expected to find it. He had thought to see one of those trim, neat little villas
     surrounded by gay, exquisitely tended little gardens which are the pride of the Parisian
     suburban dweller.
Madame Wachner caught his glance, and the thought crossed her mind uncomfortably that she had
     perhaps made a mistake, a serious mistake, in asking this priggish-looking Englishman to come
     to the Châlet des Muguets. He evidently did not like the look of the place.
"You wonder to see our garden so untidy," she exclaimed, regretfully. "Well, it is the
     owner's fault, not ours! You would not believe such a thing of a Frenchman, but 'e actually
     made us promise that we would do nothing—no, nothing at all, to 'is garden. 'E spoke of sending
     a man once a week to see after it, but no, 'e never did so."
"I have often wondered," broke in Sylvia frankly, "why you allowed your garden to get into
     such a state, but now, of course, I understand. What a very odd person your landlord must be,
     Madame Wachner! It might be such a delightful place if kept in good order. But I'm glad you
     have had the grass cut. I remember the first time I came here the grass was tremendously high,
     both in front and behind the house. Yesterday I saw that you have had it cut."
"Yes," said Madame Wachner, glancing at her, "yes, we had the grass cut a few days ago. Fritz
     insisted on it."
"If it had been as high as it was the first time I came here, I could never have made my way
     through it to the delightful little wood that lies over there, behind the châlet," went on
     Sylvia. "I don't think I told you that I went over there yesterday and waited a while, hoping
     that you would come back."
"You went into the wood!" echoed Madame Wachner in a startled tone. "You should not have done
     that," she shook her head gravely. "We are forbidden to go into the wood. We 'ave never gone
     into the wood."
L'Ami Fritz stood waiting for his visitors in the narrow doorway. He looked more
     good-tempered than usual, and as they walked in he chatted pleasantly to Chester.
"This way," he said, importantly. "Do not trouble to go into the salon, Madame! We shall have
     tea here, of course."
And Sylvia Bailey was amused, as well as rather touched, to see the preparations which had
     been made in the little dining-room for the entertainment of Bill Chester and of herself.
In the middle of the round table which had looked so bare yesterday was a bowl of white
     roses—roses that had never grown in the untidy garden outside. Two dessert dishes were heaped
     up with delicious cakes—the cakes for which French pastrycooks are justly famed. There was also
     a basin full of the Alpine strawberries which Sylvia loved, and of which she always ordered a
     goodly supply at the Villa du Lac. Madame Wachner had even remembered to provide the thick
     cream, which, to a foreign taste, spoils the delicate flavour of strawberries.
They were really very kind people, these Wachners!
Looking round the funny little dining-room, Sylvia could not help remembering how
     uncomfortable she had felt when sitting there alone the day before. It was hard now to believe
     that she should have had that queer, eerie feeling of discomfort and disquietude in such a
     commonplace, cheerful room. She told herself that there probably had been some little creature
     hidden there—some shy, wild thing, which maybe had crept in out of the wood.
"And now I will go and make the tea," said Madame Wachner pleasantly, and Sylvia gaily
     insisted on accompanying her hostess into the kitchen.
"We shall 'ave a nicer tea than that first time we made tea 'ere together," said Madame
     Wachner jovially.
The young Englishwoman shook her head, smiling.
"I had a very good time that afternoon!" she cried. "And I shall always feel grateful for
     your kindness to me and to poor Anna, Madame Wachner. I do so often wonder what Anna is doing
     with herself, and where she is staying in Paris." She looked wistfully at her companion.
Madame Wachner was in the act of pouring the boiling water into her china teapot.
"Ah, well," she said, bending over it, "we shall never know that. Your friend was a strange
     person, what I call a solitaire. She did not like gambling when there were people whom
     she knew in the Baccarat Room with her. As to what she is doing now—" she shrugged her
     shoulders, expressively.
"You know she telegraphed for her luggage yesterday?" said Sylvia slowly.
"In that case—if it has had time to arrive—Madame Wolsky is probably on her way to Aix,
     perhaps even to Monte Carlo. She did not seem to mind whether it was hot or cold if she could
     get what she wanted—that is, Play—"
Madame Wachner had now made the tea. She turned and stood with arms akimbo, staring out of
     the little window which gave on the sun-baked lawn bounded by the chestnut wood.
"No," she said slowly, "I do not for a moment suppose that you will ever see Madame Wolsky
     again. It would surprise me very much if you were to do so. For one thing, she must be—well,
     rather ashamed of the way she treated you—you who were so kind to her, Sylvie!"
"She was far kinder to me than I was to her," said Sylvia in a low voice.
"Ah, my dear"—Madame Wachner put her fat hand on Sylvia's shoulder—"you have such a kind,
     warm, generous heart—that is the truth! No, no, Anna Wolsky was not able to appreciate such a
     friend as you are! But now the tea is made, made strong to the English taste, we must not leave
     L'Ami Fritz and Mr. Chester alone together. Gentleman are dull without ladies."
Carrying the teapot she led the way into the dining-room, and they sat down round the
     table.
The little tea-party went off fairly well, but Chester could not forget his strange
     conversation with Sylvia in the motor. Somehow, he and she had never come so really near to one
     another as they had done that afternoon. And yet, on the other hand, he felt that she was quite
     unlike what he had thought her to be. It was as if he had come across a new Sylvia.
Madame Wachner, looking at his grave, absorbed face, felt uneasy. Was it possible that this
     Englishman intended to take pretty Mrs. Bailey away from Lacville? That would be a pity—a very
     great pity!
She glanced apprehensively at her husband. L'Ami Fritz would make himself very unpleasant if
     Sylvia left Lacville just now. He would certainly taunt his wife with all the money they had
     spent on her entertainment—it was money which they both intended should bear a very high rate
     of interest.
The two following days dragged themselves uneventfully away. Sylvia did her best to be kind
     to Bill Chester, but she felt ill at ease, and could not help showing it.
And then she missed the excitement and interest of the Casino. Bill had not suggested that
     they should go there, and she would not be the one to do so.
The long motoring expeditions they took each afternoon gave her no pleasure. Her heart was
     far away, in Brittany; in imagination she was standing by a grave surrounded by a shadowy group
     of men and women, mourning the old Marquise who had left Count Paul the means to become once
     more a self-respecting and respected member of the world to which he belonged by right of
     birth....
Had it not been for the Wachners, these two days of dual solitude with Chester would have
     been dreary indeed, but Madame Wachner was their companion on more than one long excursion and
     wherever Madame Wachner went there reigned a kind of jollity and sense of cheer.
Sylvia wondered if the Comte de Virieu was indeed coming back as he had said he would do. And
     yet she knew that were he to return now, at once, to his old ways, his family, those who loved
     him, would have the right to think him incorrigible.
As is the way with a woman when she loves, Sylvia did not consider herself as a factor
     affecting his return to Lacville. Nay, she was bitterly hurt that he had not written her a line
     since he had left.
And now had come the evening of the day when Count Paul had meant to come back. But M.
     Polperro said no word of his return. Still, it was quite possible that he would arrive late,
     and Sylvia did not wish to see him when in the company, not only of Bill Chester, but also of
     the Wachners.
Somehow or other, she had fallen into the habit each evening of asking the Wachners to
     dinner. She did so to-day, but suggested dining at a restaurant.
"Yes, if this time, dear Sylvia, the host is L'Ami Fritz!" said Madame Wachner decidedly. And
     after a slight demur Sylvia consented.
They dined at the hotel which is just opposite the Casino. After the pleasant meal was over,
     for it had been pleasant, and the cheerful hostess had taken special pains over the menu,
     Sylvia weary at the thought of another long, dull evening in the drawing-room of the Villa du
     Lac, was secretly pleased to hear Madame Wachner exclaim coaxingly:
"And now, I do 'ope, Mr. Chester, that you will come over and spend this evening at the
     Casino! I know you do not approve of the play that goes on there, but still, believe me, it is
     the only thing to do at Lacville. Lacville would be a very dull place were it not for the
     Casino!"
Chester smiled.
"You think me far more particular than I am really," he said, lightly. "I don't in the least
     mind going to the Casino." Why should he be a spoil-sport? "But I confess I cannot understand
     the kind of attraction play has for some minds. For instance, I cannot understand the
     extraordinary fascination it seems to exercise over such an intelligent man as is that Comte de
     Virieu."
Madame Wachner looked at the speaker significantly.
"Ah!" she said. "The poor Count! 'E is what you call 'confirmed'—a confirmed gambler. And 'e
     will now be able to play more than ever, for I 'ear a fortune 'as been left to 'im!"
Sylvia was startled. She wondered how the Wachners could have come to know of the Count's
     legacy. She got up, with a nervous, impatient gesture.
How dull, how long, how intolerable had been the last two days spent by her in the company of
     Bill Chester, varied by that of talkative Madame Wachner and the silent, dour Ami Fritz!
Her heart felt very sore. During that last hour she and Count Paul had spent together in the
     garden, she had begged him to stay away—to spend the rest of the summer with his sister.
     Supposing he took her at her word—supposing he never came back to Lacville at all? Sylvia tried
     to tell herself that in that case she would be glad, and that she only wanted her friend to do
     the best, the wisest thing for himself.
Such were her thoughts—her painful thoughts—as she walked across from the restaurant to the
     entrance of the Casino. Two whole days had gone by since she had been there last, and oh! how
     long each hour of those days had seemed!
The two oddly-assorted couples passed through into the hall, and so up to the closely-guarded
     doors of the Club.
The Baccarat Room was very full, fuller than usual, for several parties of merry, rather
     boisterous young men had come out from Paris to spend the evening.
She heard the words that were now so familiar, solemnly shouted out at the further table:
      "La Banque est aux enchères. Qui prend la Banque?"
There was a pause, and there fell on Sylvia's ears the murmur of two voices—the voice of the
     official who represented the Casino authorities, and the deep, low voice which had become so
     dear to her—which thrilled her heart each time she heard it.
Then Count Paul had come back? He had not followed her advice? And instead of being sorry, as
     she ought to have been, she was glad—glad! Not glad to know that he was here in the
     Casino—Sylvia was sorry for that—but glad that he was once more close to her. Till this moment
     she had scarcely realised how much his mere presence meant to her.
She could not see Paul de Virieu, for there was a crowd—a noisy, chattering crowd of
     over-dressed men, each with a gaudily-dressed feminine companion—encompassing her on every
     side.
"Vingt mille francs en Banque! Une fois, deux fois, messieurs?" A pause—then the
     words repeated. "Vingt mille francs en Banque!"
Monsieur Wachner leant his tall, lean form over Sylvia. She looked up surprised, L'Ami Fritz
     very seldom spoke to her, or for the matter of that to anyone.
"You must play to-night, Madame!" he said imperiously. "I have a feeling that to-night you
     will bring us luck, as you did that first time you played."
She looked at him hesitatingly. His words made her remember the friend to whom she so seldom
     gave a thought nowadays.
"Do you remember how pleased poor Anna was that night?" she whispered.
Monsieur Wachner stared at her, and a look of fear, almost of terror, came over his drawn,
     hatchet face.
"Do not speak of her," he exclaimed harshly. "It might bring us ill-luck!"
And then Chester broke in, "Sylvia, do play if you want to play!" he cried rather
     impatiently. It angered him to feel that she would not do in his presence what she would most
     certainly have done were he not there.
And then Sylvia suddenly made up her mind that she would play. Count Paul was holding the
     Bank. He was risking—how much was it?—twenty thousand francs. Eight hundred pounds of his
     legacy? That was madness, absolute madness on his part! Well, she would gamble too! There came
     across her a curious feeling—one that gave her a certain painful joy—the feeling that they two
     were one. While he was risking his money, she would try to win his money. Were he in luck
     to-night, she would be glad to know that it would be her money he would win.
M. Wachner officiously made room for her at the table; and, as she sat down, the Comte de
     Virieu, looking round, saw who had come there, and he flushed and looked away, straight in
     front of him.
"A Madame la main," said Monsieur Wachner eagerly indicating Sylvia. And the
     croupier, with a smile, pushed the two fateful cards towards the fair young Englishwoman.
Sylvia took up the two cards. She glanced down at them. Yes, L'Ami Fritz had been right. She
     was in luck to-night! In a low voice she uttered the welcome words—in French, of course—the
     words "Nine" and "The King," as she put the cards, face upwards, on the green cloth.
And then there came for her and for those who backed her, just as there had done on that
     first fateful evening at the Casino, an extraordinary run of good fortune.
Again and again the cards were dealt to Sylvia, and again and again she turned up a Nine, a
     Queen, a King, an Eight—. Once more the crowd excitedly followed her luck, staring at her with
     grateful pleasure, with fascinated interest, as she brought them temporary wealth.
The more she won, the more she made other people win, the more miserable Sylvia felt, and as
     she saw Count Paul's heap of notes and gold diminishing, she grew unutterably wretched. Eight
     hundred pounds? What an enormous lot of money to risk in an evening!
Then there came a change. For a few turns of the game luck deserted her, and Sylvia breathed
     more freely. She glanced up into Count Paul's impassive face. He looked worn and tired, as well
     he might be after his long journey from Brittany.
Then once more magic fortune came back. It seemed as if only good cards—variations on the
     fateful eights and nines—could be dealt her.
Suddenly she pushed her chair back and got up. Protesting murmurs rose on every side.
"If Madame leaves, the luck will go with her!" she heard one or two people murmur
     discontentedly.
Chester was looking at her with amused, sarcastic, disapproving eyes.
"Well!" he exclaimed. "I don't wonder you enjoy gambling, Sylvia! Are you often taken this
     way? How much of that poor fellow's money have you won?"
"Ninety pounds," she answered mechanically.
"Ninety pounds! And have you ever lost as much as that, may I ask, in an evening?" he was
     still speaking with a good deal of sarcasm in his voice. But still, "money talks," and even
     against his will Chester was impressed. Ninety pounds represents a very heavy bill of costs in
     a country solicitor's practice.
Sylvia looked dully into his face.
"No," she said slowly. "No, the most I ever lost in one evening was ten pounds. I always left
     off playing when I had lost ten pounds. That is the one advantage the player has over the
     banker—he can stop playing when he has lost a small sum."
"Oh! I see!" exclaimed Chester drily.
And then they became silent, for close by where they now stood, a little apart from the
     table, an angry altercation was going on between Monsieur and Madame Wachner. It was the first
     time Sylvia had ever heard the worthy couple quarrelling in public the one with the other.
"I tell you I will not go away!" L'Ami Fritz was saying between his teeth. "I feel
     that to-night I am in luck, in great luck! What I ask you to do, Sophie, is to go away
     yourself, and leave me alone. I have made a thousand francs this evening, and at last I have an
     opportunity of trying my new system. I am determined to try it now, to-night! No—it is no use
     your speaking to me, no use reminding me of any promise I made to you. If I made such a
     promise, I mean to break it!"
Sylvia looked round, a good deal concerned. Madame Wachner's face was red, and she was
     plainly very angry and put out. But when she saw that she and her husband had attracted the
     attention of their English friends, she made a great effort to regain her self-control and good
     humour.
"Very well," she said, "Very well, Fritz! Do not speak to me as if I were an ogress or a
     dragon. I am your wife; it is my duty to obey you. But I will not stay to see you lose the good
     money you have made with the help of our kind friend, Madame Sylvia. Yes, I will go away and
     leave you, my poor Fritz."
And suiting her action to her words, she put her arm familiarly through Sylvia's and together
     they walked out of the Baccarat Room, followed by Chester.
When they were in the vestibule Madame Wachner turned to him with a rueful smile:
"It is a pity," she said, "that Fritz did not come away with us! 'E 'as made a thousand
     francs. It is a great deal of money for us to make—or to lose. I do not believe 'e will keep
     it, for, though you bring 'im luck, my dear"—she turned to Sylvia—"that Count always brings 'im
     bad luck. It 'as been proved to me again and again. Just before you arrived at Lacville with
     poor Madame Wolsky, Fritz 'ad a 'eavy loss!—a very 'eavy loss, and all because the Comte de
     Virieu 'eld the Bank!"
"Perhaps the Count will not hold the Bank again to-night," said Sylvia slowly.
"Of course, 'e will do so!" the other spoke quite crossly, "Did I not tell you, Sylvia, that
     our day servant heard from M. Polperro's wife, whose sister is cook to the Duchesse d'Eglemont,
     that the Comte de Virieu 'as been left an immense fortune by 'is godmother? Well, it is a
     fortune that will soon melt"—she chuckled, as if the thought was very pleasant to her. "But I
     do not think that any of it is likely to melt into Fritz's pocket—though, to be sure, we 'ave
     been very lucky, all of us, to-night," she looked affectionately at Sylvia.
"Even you, Sir"—Madame Wachner turned to Chester with a broad smile—"even you must be pleased
     that we came to the Casino to-night. What a pity it is you did not risk something! Even one
     pound! You might 'ave made quite a nice lot of money to take back to England with you—"
"—Or to spend in Switzerland!" said Chester, laughing. "It is to Switzerland I am going,
     Madame! I shall leave here the day after to-morrow."
"And will you not come back again?" asked Madame Wachner inquisitively.
"I may come back again if Mrs. Bailey is still here; but I do not suppose she will be, for I
     intend to spend at least a fortnight in Switzerland."
The three were now approaching the gates of the Villa du Lac.
"Well, Sylvia," cried Chester. "I suppose I must now say good-night? I do not envy you your
     ill-gotten gains!" He spoke lightly, but there was an undercurrent of reproach in his voice, or
     so Sylvia fancied.
"Good-night!" she said, and her voice was tremulous.
As she held out her hand the little fancy bag which held all her winnings, the bundle of
     notes and loose pieces of gold, fell to the ground.
Madame Wachner stooped down and picked it up. "How 'eavy it is!" she exclaimed, enviously.
     "Good gracious, Sylvia! What a lot you must 'ave made to-night?"
"And the notes don't weigh much," said Sylvia. "It's only the gold that is heavy!"
But she was not thinking of what she was saying. Her heart was full of anguish. How could
     Paul de Virieu have been so mad as to risk such an immense sum, a tenth part of the fortune—for
     fortune it was—which had just been left to him?
Sylvia hated herself for having contributed to his losses. She knew that it was absurd that
     she should feel this, for the same cards would certainly have been dealt to whoever had
     happened to take them from the croupier. But still, superstition is part of the virus
     which fills the gambler's blood, and she had certainly won a considerable part of the money
     Count Paul had lost to-night.
"May I see you back to your house?" asked Chester of Madame Wachner.
"Oh no, Monsieur, I must go back to the Casino and look after Fritz! 'E is a child—quite a
     child as regards money." Madame Wachner sighed heavily. "No, no, you go 'ome to bed in the
     Pension Malfait."
"I shouldn't think of doing such a thing!" he said kindly. "I will come back with you to the
     Casino, and together we will persuade Monsieur Wachner to go home. He has had time to make or
     lose a good deal of money in the last few minutes."
"Yes, indeed he 'as—" again Madame Wachner sighed, and Chester's heart went out to her. She
     was a really nice old woman—clever and intelligent, as well as cheerful and brave. It seemed a
     great pity that she should be cursed with a gambler for a husband.
As they went back into the Casino they could hear the people round them talking of the Comte
     de Virieu, and of the high play that had gone on at the club that evening.
"No, he is winning now," they heard someone say. And Madame Wachner looked anxious. If Count
     Paul were winning, then her Fritz must be losing.
And alas! her fears were justified. When they got up into the Baccarat Room they found L'Ami
     Fritz standing apart from the tables, his hands in his pockets, staring abstractedly out of a
     dark window on to the lake.
"Well?" cried Madame Wachner sharply, "Well, Fritz?"
"I have had no luck!" he shook his head angrily. "It is all the fault of that cursed system!
     If I had only begun at the right, the propitious moment—as I should have done if you had not
     worried me and asked me to go away—I should probably have made a great deal of money," he
     looked at her disconsolately, deprecatingly.
Chester also looked at Madame Wachner. He admired the wife's self-restraint. Her red face got
     a little redder. That was all.
"It cannot be helped," she said a trifle coldly, and in French. "I knew how it would be, so I
     am not disappointed. Have you anything left? Have you got the five louis I gave you at the
     beginning of the evening?"
Monsieur Wachner shook his head gloomily.
"Well then, it is about time we went home." She turned and led the way out.
As Sylvia went slowly and wearily up to her room a sudden horror of Lacville swept over her
     excited brain.
For the first time since she had been in the Villa du Lac, she locked the door of her
     bed-room and sat down in the darkness.
She was overwhelmed with feelings of humiliation and pain. She told herself with bitter
     self-scorn that Paul de Virieu cared nothing for her. If he had cared ever so little he surely
     would never have done what he had done to-night?
But such thoughts were futile, and soon she rose and turned on the electric light. Then she
     sat down at a little writing-table which had been thoughtfully provided for her by M. Polperro,
     and hurriedly, with feverish eagerness, wrote a note.
Dear Count de Virieu—
I am very tired to-night, and I do not feel as if I should be well enough to ride
      to-morrow.—Yours sincerely,
Sylvia Bailey.
That was all, but it was enough. Hitherto she had evidently been—hateful thought—what the
     matrons of Market Dalling called "coming on" in her manner to Count Paul; henceforth she would
     be cold and distant to him.
She put her note into an envelope, addressed it, and went downstairs again. It was very late,
     but M. Polperro was still up. The landlord never went to bed till each one of his clients was
     safe indoors.
"Will you kindly see that the Comte de Virieu gets this to-night?" she said briefly. And
     then, as the little man looked at her with some surprise, "It is to tell the Count that I
     cannot ride to-morrow morning. It is late, and I am very tired; sleepy, too, after the long
     motoring expedition I took this afternoon!" She tried to smile.
M. Polperro bowed.
"Certainly, Madame. The Count shall have this note the moment he returns from the Casino. He
     will not be long now."
But the promises of Southerners are pie-crust. Doubtless M. Polperro meant the Count to have
     the note that night, but he put it aside and forgot all about it.
Sylvia had a broken night, and she was still sleeping heavily when she was wakened by the now
     familiar sound of the horses being brought into the courtyard. She jumped out of bed and peeped
     through an opening in the closed curtains.
It was a beautiful morning. The waters of the lake dimpled in the sun. A door opened, and
     Sylvia heard voices. Then Count Paul was going riding after all, and by himself? Sylvia felt a
     pang of unreasoning anger and regret.
Paul de Virieu and M. Polperro were standing side by side; suddenly she saw the hotel-keeper
     hand the Count, with a gesture of excuse, the note she had written the night before. Count Paul
     read it through, then he put it back in its envelope, and placed it in the breast pocket of his
     coat.
He did not send the horses away, as Sylvia in her heart had rather hoped he would do, but he
     said a word to M. Polperro, who ran into the Villa and returned a moment later with something
     which he handed, with a deferential bow to the Count.
It was a cardcase, and Paul de Virieu scribbled something on a card and gave it to M.
     Polperro. A minute later he had ridden out of the gates.
Sylvia moved away from the window, but she was in no mood to go back to bed. She felt
     restless, excited, sorry that she had given up her ride.
When at last her tea was brought in, she saw the Count's card lying on the tray:
Madame—
I regret very much to hear that you are not well—so ran his pencilled words—but I trust you
      will be able to come down this morning, for I have a message to give you from my sister.
Believe me, Madame, of all your servants the most devoted.
Paul de Virieu.
They met in the garden—the garden which they had so often had to themselves during their
     short happy mornings; and, guided by an instinctive longing for solitude, and for being out of
     sight and out of mind of those about them, they made their way towards the arch in the wall
     which led to the potager.
It was just ten o'clock, and the gardeners were leaving off work for an hour; they had earned
     their rest, for their work begins each summer day at sunrise. It was therefore through a
     sweet-smelling, solitary wilderness that Count Paul guided his companion.
They walked along the narrow paths edged with fragrant herbs till they came to the extreme
     end of the kitchen-garden, and then—
"Shall we go into the orangery?" he asked abruptly.
Sylvia nodded. These were the first words he had uttered since his short "Good morning. I
     hope, Madame, you are feeling better?"
He stepped aside to allow her to go first into the large, finely-proportioned building, which
     was so charming a survival of eighteenth-century taste. The orangery was cool, fragrant,
     deserted; remote indeed from all that Lacville stands for in this ugly, utilitarian world.
"Won't you sit down?" he said slowly. And then, as if echoing his companion's thoughts, "It
     seems a long, long time since we were first in the orangery, Madame—"
"—When you asked me so earnestly to leave Lacville," said Sylvia, trying to speak lightly.
     She sat down on the circular stone seat, and, as he had done on that remembered morning when
     they were still strangers, he took his place at the other end of it.
"Well?" he said, looking at her fixedly. "Well, you see I came back after all!"
Sylvia made no answer.
"I ought not to have done so. It was weak of me." He did not look at her as he spoke; he was
     tracing imaginary patterns on the stone floor.
"I came back," he concluded, in a low, bitter tone, "because I could not stay any longer away
     from you."
And still Sylvia remained silent.
"Do you not believe that?" he asked, rather roughly.
And then at last she looked up and spoke.
"I think you imagine that to be the case," she said, "but I am sure that it is not I, alone,
     who brought you back to Lacville."
"And yet it is you—you alone!" he exclaimed and he jumped up and came and stood before
     her.
"God knows I do not wish to deceive you. Perhaps, if I had not come back here, I should in
     time—not at once, Madame,—have gone somewhere else, where I could enjoy the only thing in life
     which had come to be worth while living for. But it was you—you alone—that brought me back
     here, to Lacville!"
"Why did you go straight to the Casino?" she faltered. "And why?—oh, why did you risk all
     that money?"
He shrugged his shoulders.
"Because I am a fool!" he answered, bitterly—"a fool, and what the English rightly call 'a
     dog in the manger!' I ought to rejoice when I see you with that excellent fellow, Mr.
     Chester—and as your friend," he stopped short and then ended his sentence with the words, "I
     ought to be happy to know that you will have so excellent a husband!"
Sylvia also got up.
"You are quite mistaken," she said, coldly. "I shall never marry Mr. Chester."
"I regret to hear you say that," said Count Paul, seriously. "A woman should not live alone,
     especially a woman who is young and beautiful, and—and who has money."
Sylvia shook her head. She was angry—more hurt and angry than she had ever felt before in her
     life. She told herself passionately that the Comte de Virieu was refusing that which had not
     been offered to him.
"You are very kind," she answered, lightly. "But I have managed very well up to now, and I
     think I shall go on managing very well. You need not trouble yourself about the matter, Count
     Paul. Mr. Chester and I thoroughly understand one another—" She waited, and gently she added,
     "I wish I could understand you—"
"I wish I understood myself," he said sombrely. "But there is one thing that I believe myself
     incapable of doing. Whatever my feeling, nay, whatever my love, for a woman, I would never do
     so infamous a thing as to try and persuade her to join her life to mine. I know too well to
     what I should be exposing her—to what possible misery, nay, to what probable degradation! After
     all, a man is free to go to the devil alone—but he has no right to drag a woman there with
     him!"
His voice had sunk to a hoarse whisper, and he was gazing into Sylvia's pale face with an
     anguished look of questioning and of pleading pain.
"I think that is true, Count Paul." Sylvia heard herself uttering gently, composedly, the
     words which meant at once so much and so little to them both. "It is a pity that all men do not
     feel about this as you do," she concluded mechanically.
"I felt sure you would agree with me," he answered slowly.
"Ought we not to be going back to the villa? I am expecting Mr. Chester to lunch, and though
     I know it is quite early, he has got into the way, these last few days, of coming early."
Her words stung him in his turn.
"Stop!" he said roughly. "Do not go yet, Mrs. Bailey." He muttered between his teeth, "Mr.
     Chester's turn will come!" And then aloud, "Is this to be the end of everything—the end of
     our—our friendship? I shall leave Lacville to-night for I do not care to stay on here after you
     have taunted me with having come back to see you!"
Sylvia gave a little cry of protest.
"How unkind you are, Count Paul!" She still tried to speak lightly, but the tears were now
     rolling down her cheeks—and then in a moment she found herself in Paul de Virieu's arms. She
     felt his heart beating against her breast.
"Oh, my darling!" he whispered brokenly, in French, "my darling, how I love you!"
"But if you love me," she said piteously, "what does anything else matter?"
Her hand had sought his hand. He grasped it for a moment and then let it go.
"It is because I love you—because I love you more than I love myself that I give you up," he
     said, but, being human, he did not give her up there and then. Instead, he drew her closer to
     him, and his lips sought and found her sweet, tremulous mouth.
And Chester? Chester that morning for the first time in his well-balanced life felt not only
     ill but horribly depressed. He had come back to the Pension Malfait the night before feeling
     quite well, and as cheerful as his disapproval of Sylvia Bailey's proceedings at the Casino
     allowed him to be. And while thoroughly disapproving, he had yet—such being human nature—been
     glad that Sylvia had won and not lost!
The Wachners had offered to drive him back to his pension, and he had accepted, for it was
     very late, and Madame Wachner, in spite of her Fritz's losses, had insisted on taking a
     carriage home.
And then, though he had begun by going to sleep, Chester had waked at the end of an hour to
     feel himself encompassed, environed, oppressed by the perception—it was far more than
     a sensation—that he was no longer alone.
He sat up in bed and struck a match, at once longing and fearing to see a form,—the semblance
     of a human being—rise out of the darkness.
But all he saw, when he had lighted the candle which stood on the table by his bed, was the
     barely furnished room which, even in this poor and wavering light, had so cheerful and
     commonplace an appearance.
Owing no doubt to his excellent physical condition, as well as to his good conscience,
     Chester was a fearless man. A week ago he would have laughed to scorn the notion that the dead
     ever revisit the earth, as so many of us believe they do, but the four nights he had spent at
     the Pension Malfait, had shaken his conviction that "dead men rise up never."
Most reluctantly he had come to the conclusion that the Pension Malfait was haunted.
And the feeling of unease did not vanish even after he had taken his bath in the queer
     bath-room, of which the Malfaits were so proud, or later, when he had eaten the excellent
     breakfast provided for him. On the contrary, the thought of going up to his bed-room, even in
     broad daylight, filled him with a kind of shrinking fear.
He told himself angrily that this kind of thing could not go on. The sleepless nights made
     him ill—he who never was ill; also he was losing precious days of his short holiday, while
     doing no good to himself and no good to Sylvia.
Sending for the hotel-keeper, he curtly told him that he meant to leave Lacville that
     evening.
M. Malfait expressed much sorrow and regret. Was M'sieur not comfortable? Was there anything
     he could do to prolong his English guest's stay?
No, M'sieur had every reason to be satisfied, but—but had M. Malfait ever had any complaints
     of noises in the bed-room occupied by his English guest?
The Frenchman's surprise and discomfiture seemed quite sincere; but Chester, looking into his
     face, suspected that the wondering protests, the assertion that this particular bed-room was
     the quietest in the house, were not sincere. In this, however he wronged poor M. Malfait.
Chester went upstairs and packed. There seemed to be a kind of finality in the act. If she
     knew he was ready to start that night, Sylvia would not be able to persuade him to stay on, as
     she probably would try to do.
At the Villa du Lac he was greeted with, "Madame Bailey is in the garden with the Comte de
     Virieu"—and he thought he saw a twinkle in merry little M. Polperro's eyes.
Poor Sylvia! Poor, foolish, wilful Sylvia! Was it conceivable that after what she had seen
     the night before she still liked, she still respected, that mad French gambler?
He looked over the wide lawn; no, there was no sign of Sylvia and the Count. Then, all at
     once, coming through a door which gave access, as he knew, to the big kitchen-garden of the
     villa, he saw Mrs. Bailey's graceful figure; a few steps behind her walked Count Paul.
Chester hurried towards them. How odd they both looked—and how ill at ease! The Comte de
     Virieu looked wretched, preoccupied, and gloomy—as well he might do, considering the large sum
     of money he had lost last night. As for Sylvia—yes, there could be no doubt about it—she had
     been crying! When she saw Chester coming towards her, she instinctively tilted her garden hat
     over her face to hide her reddened eyelids. He felt at once sorry for, and angry with, her.
"I came early in order to tell you," he said abruptly, "that I find I must leave Lacville
     to-day! The man whom I am expecting to join me in Switzerland is getting impatient, so I've
     given notice to the Pension Malfait—in fact, I've already packed."
Sylvia gave him a listless glance, and made no comment on his news.
Chester felt rather nettled. "You, I suppose, will be staying on here for some time?" he
     said.
"I don't know," she answered in a low voice. "I haven't made up my mind how long I shall stay
     here."
"I also am leaving Lacville," said the Comte de Virieu.
And then, as he saw, or fancied he saw, a satirical expression pass over the Englishman's
     face, he added rather haughtily:
"Strange to say, my luck turned last night—I admit I did not deserve it—and I left off with a
     good deal to the good. However, I feel I have played enough for a while, and, as I have been
     telling Mrs. Bailey, I think it would do me good to go away. In fact"—and then Count Paul gave
     an odd little laugh—"I also am going to Switzerland! In old days I was a member of our Alpine
     Club."
Chester made a sudden resolve, and, what was rare in one so constitutionally prudent, acted
     on it at once.
"If you are really going to Switzerland," he said quietly, "then why should we not travel
     together? I meant to go to-night, but if you prefer to wait till to-morrow, Count, I can alter
     my arrangements."
The Comte de Virieu remained silent for what seemed to the two waiting for his answer a very
     long time.
"This evening will suit me just as well as to-morrow," he said at last.
He did not look at Sylvia. He had not looked her way since Chester had joined them. With a
     hand that shook a little he took his cigarette-case out of his pocket, and held it out to the
     other man.
The die was cast. So be it. Chester, prig though he might be, was right in his wish to remove
     Sylvia from his, Paul de Virieu's, company. The Englishman was more right than he would ever
     know.
How amazed Chester would have been had he been able to see straight into Paul de Virieu's
     heart! Had he divined the other's almost unendurable temptation to take Sylvia Bailey at her
     word, to impose on her pathetic ignorance of life, to allow her to become a gambler's wife.
Had the woman he loved been penniless, the Comte de Virieu would probably have yielded to the
     temptation which now came in the subtle garb of jealousy—keen, poisoned-fanged jealousy of this
     fine looking young Englishman who stood before them both.
Would Sylvia ever cling to this man as she had clung to him—would she ever allow Chester to
     kiss her as she had allowed Paul to kiss her, and that after he had released the hand she had
     laid in his?
But alas! there are kisses and kisses—clingings and clingings. Chester, so the Frenchman with
     his wide disillusioned knowledge of life felt only too sure, would win Sylvia in time.
"Shall we go in and find out the time of the Swiss express?" he asked the other man, "or
     perhaps you have already decided on a train?"
"No, I haven't looked one out yet."
They strolled off together towards the house, and Sylvia walked blindly on to the grass and
     sat down on one of the rocking-chairs of which M. Polperro was so proud.
She looked after the two men with a sense of oppressed bewilderment. Then they were both
     going away—both going to leave her?
After to-day—how strange, how utterly unnatural the parting seemed—she would probably never
     see Paul de Virieu again.
The day went like a dream—a fantastic, unreal dream.
Sylvia did not see Count Paul again alone. She and Chester went a drive in the afternoon—the
     expedition had been arranged the day before with the Wachners, and there seemed no valid reason
     why it should be put off.
And then Madame Wachner with her usual impulsive good nature, on hearing that both Chester
     and the Comte de Virieu were going away, warmly invited Sylvia to supper at the Châlet des
     Muguets for that same night, and Sylvia listlessly accepted. She did not care what she did or
     where she went.
At last came the moment of parting.
"I'll go and see you off at the station," she said, and Chester, rather surprised, raised one
     or two objections. "I'm determined to come," she cried angrily. "What a pity it is, Bill, that
     you always try and manage other people's business for them!"
And she did go to the station—only to be sorry for it afterwards.
Paul de Virieu, holding her hand tightly clasped in his for the last time, had become
     frightfully pale, and as she made her way back to the Casino, where the Wachners were actually
     waiting for her, Sylvia was haunted by his reproachful, despairing eyes.
It was nearly nine o'clock, and for the moment the Casino was very empty, for the afternoon
     players had left, and the evening serie, as M. Polperro contemptuously called them—the
     casual crowd of night visitors to Lacville—had not yet arrived from Paris.
"And now," said Madame Wachner, suddenly, "is it not time for us to go and 'ave our little
     supper?"
The "citizeness of the world" had been watching her husband and Sylvia playing at Baccarat;
     both of them had won, and Sylvia had welcomed, eagerly, the excitement of the tables.
Count Paul's muttered farewell echoed in her ears, and the ornately decorated gambling room
     seemed full of his presence.
She made a great effort to put any intimate thought of him away. The next day, so she told
     herself, she would go back to England, to Market Dalling. There she must forget that such a
     place as Lacville existed; there she must banish Paul de Virieu from her heart and memory. Yes,
     there was nothing now to keep her here, in this curious place, where she had eaten, in more
     than one sense, of the bitter fruit of the tree of knowledge.
With a deep, involuntary sigh, she rose from the table.
She looked at the green cloth, at the people standing round it, with an odd feeling that
     neither the table nor the people round her were quite real. Her heart and thoughts were far
     away, with the two men both of whom loved her in their very different ways.
Then she turned with an unmirthful smile to her companions. It would not be fair to let her
     private griefs sadden the kindly Wachners. It was really good of them to have asked her to come
     back to supper at the Châlet des Muguets. She would have found it terribly lonely this evening
     at the Villa du Lac....
"I am quite ready," she said, addressing herself more particularly to Madame Wachner; and the
     three walked out of the Club rooms.
"Shall we take a carriage?" Sylvia asked diffidently; she knew her stout friend disliked
     walking.
"No, no," said Monsieur Wachner shortly. "There is no need to take a carriage to-night; it is
     so fine, and, besides, it is not very far."
He so seldom interfered or negatived any suggestion that Sylvia felt a little surprised, the
     more so that it was really a long walk from the Casino to the lonely Châlet des Muguets. But as
     Madame Wachner had nodded assent to her husband's words, their English guest said no more.
They started out into the moonlit night, Sylvia with her light, springing step keeping pace
     with L'Ami Fritz, while his wife lagged a step behind. But, as was usual with him, M. Wachner
     remained silent, while his companions talked.
To-night, however, Madame Wachner did not show her usual tact; she began discussing the two
     travellers who were now well started, no doubt, on their way to Switzerland, and she expressed
     contemptuous surprise that the Comte de Virieu had left Lacville.
"I am glad 'e 'as gone away," she said cheerfully, "for the Count is what English people call
     so supercilious—so different to that excellent Mr. Chester! I wonder Mr. Chester was willing
     for the Count's company. But you 'ave not lost 'im, my pretty Sylvia! 'E will soon be
     back!"
As she spoke she laughed coarsely, and Sylvia made no answer. She thought it probable that
     she would never see the Comte de Virieu again, and the conviction hurt intolerably. It was
     painful to be reminded of him now, in this way, and by a woman who she knew disliked and
     despised him.
She suddenly felt sorry that she had accepted the Wachner's invitation.
To-night the way to the Châlet des Muguets seemed longer than usual—far longer than it had
     seemed the last time Sylvia had walked there, when Count Paul had been her companion. It seemed
     as if an immense time had gone by since then....
Sylvia was glad when at last the three of them came within sight of the familiar white gate.
     How strangely lonely the little house looked, standing back in the twilit darkness of a summer
     night.
"I wonder"—Sylvia Bailey looked up at her silent companion, L'Ami Fritz had not opened his
     lips once during the walk from the Casino, "I wonder that you and Madame Wachner are not afraid
     to leave the châlet alone for so many hours of each day! Your servant always goes away after
     lunch, doesn't she?"
"There is nothing to steal," he answered shortly. "We always carry all our money about with
     us—all sensible people do so at Lacville and at Monte Carlo."
Madame Wachner was now on Sylvia's other side.
"Yes," she interposed, rather breathlessly, "that is so; and I 'ope that you, dear friend,
     followed the advice we gave you about the matter? I mean, I 'ope you do not leave your money in
     the hotel?"
"Of course I don't," said Sylvia, smiling. "Ever since you gave me those pretty little
     leather pouches I always carry all my money about with me, strapped round my waist. At first it
     wasn't very comfortable, but I have got quite used to it now."
"That is right," said Madame Wachner, heartily, "that is quite right! There are rogues
     everywhere, perhaps even in the Villa du Lac, if we knew everything!" and Sylvia's hostess
     laughed in the darkness her hearty, jovial laugh.
Suddenly she bent forward and addressed her husband. "By the way, Ami Fritz, have you written
     that letter to the Villa du Lac?" She nodded, explaining to Sylvia, "We are anxious to get a
     room in your beautiful pension for a rich friend of ours."
Sylvia had the instant feeling—she could not have told why—that his wife's question had
     greatly annoyed Monsieur Wachner.
"Of course I have written the letter!" he snapped out. "Do I ever forget anything?"
"But I'm afraid there is no room vacant in the Villa du Lac," said Sylvia. "And yet—well, I
     suppose they have not yet had time to let the Comte de Virieu's room. They only knew he was
     going this morning. But you need not have troubled to write a letter, Monsieur Wachner. I could
     have given the message when I got back to-night. In any case let me take your letter."
"Ah! but the person in question may arrive before you get back," said Madame Wachner. "No,
     no, we have arranged to send the letter by a cabman who will call for it."
Monsieur Wachner pushed opened the white gate, and all three began walking up through the
     garden. The mantle of night now draped every straggling bush, every wilted flower, and the
     little wilderness was filled with delicious, pungent night scents.
When they reached the front door L'Ami Fritz stooped down, and began looking under the
     mat.
Sylvia smiled in the darkness; there seemed something so primitive, so simple, in keeping the
     key of one's front door outside under the mat! And yet foolish, prejudiced people spoke of
     Lacville as a dangerous spot, as the plague pit of Paris.
Suddenly the door was opened by the day-servant. And both the husband and wife uttered an
     involuntary exclamation of surprise and displeasure.
"What are you doing here?" asked Madame Wachner harshly. There was a note of dismay, as well
     as of anger, in her voice.
The woman began to excuse herself volubly. "I thought I might be of some use, Madame. I
     thought I might help you with all the last details."
"There was no necessity—none at all—for doing anything of the kind," said her mistress, in a
     low, quick voice. "You had been paid! You had had your present! However, as you are
     here, you may as well lay a third place in the dining-room, for, as you see, we have brought
     Madame Bailey back to have a little supper. She will only stay a very few moments, as she has
     to be at the Villa du Lac by ten o'clock."
The woman turned and threw open the door of the dining-room. Then she struck a match, and
     lighted a lamp which stood on the table.
Sylvia, as is often the case with those who have been much thrown with French people, could
     understand French much better than she could speak it, and what Madame Wachner had just hissed
     out in rapid, mumbling tones, surprised and puzzled her.
It was quite untrue that she, Sylvia, had to be back at the Villa du Lac by ten o'clock—for
     the matter of that, she could stay out as long and as late as she liked.
Then, again, although the arrangement that she should come to supper at the Châlet des
     Muguets to-night had been made that afternoon, the Wachners had been home, but they had
     evidently forgotten to tell their servant that they were expecting a visitor, for only two
     places were laid in the little dining-room into which they all three walked on entering the
     house.
Propped up against the now lighted lamp was a letter addressed to Monsieur Polperro in a
     peculiar, large handwriting. L'Ami Fritz, again uttering that queer guttural exclamation,
     snatched up the envelope, and hurriedly put it into his breast-pocket.
"I brought that letter out of M'sieur's bed-room," observed the day-servant, cringingly. "I
     feared M'sieur had forgotten it! Would M'sieur like me to take it to the Villa du Lac on my way
     home?"
"No," said Monsieur Wachner, shortly. "There is no need for you to do that; Madame Bailey
     will kindly take it for me."
And again Sylvia felt surprised. Surely he had said—or was it Madame Wachner?—that they had
     arranged for a man to call for it.
His wife shouted out his name imperiously from the dark passage, "Fritz! Fritz! Come here a
     moment; I want you."
He hurried out of the room, and Sylvia and the servant were thus left alone together for a
     few moments in the dining-room.
The woman went to the buffet and took up a plate; she came and placed it noisily on the
     table, and, under cover of the sound she made, "Do not stay here, Madame," she whispered,
     thrusting her wrinkled, sharp-featured face close to the Englishwoman's. "Come away with me!
     Say you want me to wait a bit and conduct you back to the Villa du Lac."
Sylvia stared at her distrustfully. This femme de ménage had a disagreeable face;
     there was a cunning, avaricious look in her eyes, or so Mrs. Bailey fancied; no doubt she
     remembered the couple of francs which had been given to her, or rather extorted by her, on the
     occasion of the English lady's last visit to the Châlet des Muguets.
"I will not say more," the servant went on, speaking very quickly, and under her breath. "But
     I am an honest woman, and these people frighten me. Still, I am not one to want embarrassments
     with the police."
And Sylvia suddenly remembered that those were exactly the words which had been uttered by
     Anna Wolsky's landlady in connection with Anna's disappearance. How frightened French people
     seemed to be of the police!
There came the sound of steps in the passage, and the Frenchwoman moved away quickly from
     Sylvia's side. She took up the plate she had just placed on the table, and to Sylvia's mingled
     disgust and amusement began rubbing it vigorously with her elbow.
Monsieur Wachner entered the room.
"That will do, that will do, Annette," he said patronisingly. "Come here, my good woman! Your
     mistress and I desire to give you a further little gift as you have shown so much zeal to-day,
     so here is twenty francs."
"Merci, M'sieur."
Without looking again at Sylvia the woman went out of the room, and a moment later the front
     door slammed behind her.
"My wife discovered that it is Annette's fête day to-morrow, and gave her a trifle. But she
     was evidently not satisfied, and no doubt that was why she stayed on to-night," observed
     Monsieur Wachner solemnly.
Madame Wachner now came in. She had taken off her bonnet and changed her elastic-sided boots
     for easy slippers.
"Oh, those French people!" she exclaimed. "How greedy they are for money! But—well, Annette
     has earned her present very fairly—" She shrugged her shoulders.
"May I go and take off my hat?" asked Sylvia; she left the room before Madame Wachner could
     answer her, and hurried down the short, dark passage.
The door of the moonlit kitchen was ajar, and to her surprise she saw that a large trunk,
     corded and even labelled, stood in the middle of the floor. Close to the trunk was a large
     piece of sacking—and by it another coil of thick rope.
Was it possible that the Wachners, too, were leaving Lacville? If so, how very odd of them
     not to have told her!
As she opened the door of the bed-room Madame Wachner waddled up behind her.
"Wait a moment!" she cried. "Or perhaps, dear friend, you do not want a light? You see, we
     have been rather upset to-day, for L'Ami Fritz has to go away for two or three days, and that
     is a great affair! We are so very seldom separated. 'Darby and Joan,' is not that what English
     people would call us?"
"The moon is so bright I can see quite well," Sylvia was taking off her hat; she put it,
     together with a little fancy bag in which she kept the loose gold she played with at the
     gambling tables, on Madame Wachner's bed. She felt vaguely uncomfortable, for even as Madame
     Wachner had spoken she had become aware that the bed-room was almost entirely cleared of
     everything belonging to its occupants. However, the Wachners, like Anna Wolsky, had the right
     to go away without telling anyone of their intention.
As they came back into the dining-room together, Mrs. Bailey's host, who was already sitting
     down at table, looked up.
"Words! Words! Words!" he exclaimed harshly. "Instead of talking so much why do you not both
     come here and eat your suppers? I am very hungry."
Sylvia had never heard the odd, silent man speak in such a tone before, but his wife answered
     quite good-humouredly,
"You forget, Fritz, that the cabman is coming. Till he has come and gone we shall not have
     peace."
And sure enough, within a moment of her saying those words there came a sound of shuffling
     footsteps on the garden path.
Monsieur Wachner got up and went out of the room. He opened the front door, and Sylvia
     overheard a few words of the colloquy between her host and his messenger.
"Yes, you are to take it now, at once. Just leave it at the Villa du Lac. You will come for
     us—you will come, that is, for me"—Monsieur Wachner raised his voice—"to-morrow
     morning at half-past six. I desire to catch the 7.10 train to Paris."
There was a jingle of silver, and then Sylvia caught the man's answering, "Merci, c'est
      entendu, M'sieur."
But L'Ami Fritz did not come back at once to the dining-room. He went out into the garden and
     accompanied the man down to the gate.
When he came back again he put a large key on the dining-table.
"There!" he said, with a grunt of satisfaction. "Now there will be nothing to disturb us any
     more."
They all three sat down at the round dining-table. To Sylvia's surprise a very simple meal
     was set out before them. There was only one small dish of galantine. When Sylvia Bailey had
     been to supper with the Wachners before, there had always been two or three tempting cold
     dishes, and some dainty friandises as well, the whole evidently procured from the excellent
     confectioner who drives such a roaring trade at Lacville. To-night, in addition to the few
     slices of galantine, there was only a little fruit.
Then a very odd thing happened.
L'Ami Fritz helped first his wife and himself largely, then Sylvia more frugally. It was
     perhaps a slight matter, the more so that Monsieur Wachner was notoriously forgetful, being
     ever, according to his wife, absorbed in his calculations and "systems." But all the same, this
     extraordinary lack of good manners on her host's part added to Sylvia's feeling of strangeness
     and discomfort.
Indeed, the Wachners were both very unlike their usual selves this evening. Madame Wachner
     had suddenly become very serious, her stout red face was set in rather grim, grave lines; and
     twice, as Sylvia was eating the little piece of galantine which had been placed on her plate by
     L'Ami Fritz, she looked up and caught her hostess's eyes fixed on her with a curious, alien
     scrutiny.
When they had almost finished the meat, Madame Wachner suddenly exclaimed in French.
"Fritz! You have forgotten to mix the salad! Whatever made you forget such an important
     thing? You will find what is necessary in the drawer behind you."
Monsieur Wachner made no answer. He got up and pulled the drawer of the buffet open. Taking
     out of it a wooden spoon and fork, he came back to the table and began silently mixing the
     salad.
The two last times Sylvia had been at the Châlet des Muguets, her host, in deference to her
     English taste, had put a large admixture of vinegar in the salad dressing, but this time she
     saw that he soused the lettuce-leaves with oil.
At last, "Will you have some salad, Mrs. Bailey?" he said brusquely, and in English. He spoke
     English far better than did his wife.
"No," she said. "Not to-night, thank you!"
And Sylvia, smiling, looked across at Madame Wachner, expecting to see in the older woman's
     face a humorous appreciation of the fact that L'Ami Fritz had forgotten her well-known horror
     of oil.
Mrs. Bailey's dislike of the favourite French salad-dressing ingredient had long been a joke
     among the three, nay, among the four, for Anna Wolsky had been there the last time Sylvia had
     had supper with the Wachners. It had been such a merry meal!
To-night no meaning smile met hers; instead she only saw that odd, grave, considering look on
     her hostess's face.
Suddenly Madame Wachner held out her plate across the table, and L'Ami Fritz heaped it up
     with the oily salad.
Sylvia Bailey's plate was empty, but Monsieur Wachner did not seem to notice that his guest
     lacked anything. And at last, to her extreme astonishment, she suddenly saw him take up one of
     the two pieces of meat remaining on the dish, and, leaning across, drop it on his wife's plate.
     Then he helped himself to the last remaining morsel.
It was such a trifling thing really, and due of course to her host's singular
     absent-mindedness; yet, even so, taken in connection with both the Wachners' silence and odd
     manner, this lack of the commonest courtesy struck Sylvia with a kind of fear—with fear and
     with pain. She felt so hurt that the tears came into her eyes.
There was a long moment's pause—then,
"Do you not feel well," asked Madame Wachner harshly, "or are you grieving for the Comte de
     Virieu?"
Her voice had become guttural, full of coarse and cruel malice, and even as she spoke she
     went on eating voraciously.
Sylvia Bailey pushed her chair back, and rose to her feet.
"I should like to go home now," she said quietly, "for it is getting late,"—her voice shook a
     little. She was desperately afraid of disgracing herself by a childish outburst of tears. "I
     can make my way back quite well without Monsieur Wachner's escort."
She saw her host shrug his shoulders. He made a grimace at his wife; it expressed annoyance,
     nay, more, extreme disapproval.
Madame Wachner also got up. She wiped her mouth with her napkin, and then laid her hand on
     Sylvia's shoulder.
"Come, come," she exclaimed, and this time she spoke quite kindly, "you must not be cross
     with me, dear friend! I was only laughing, I was only what you call in England 'teasing.' The
     truth is I am very vexed and upset that our supper is not better. I told that fool Frenchwoman
     to get in something really nice, and she disobeyed me! I was 'ungry, too, for I 'ad no déjeuner
     to-day, and that makes one 'ollow, does it not? But now L'Ami Fritz is going to make us some
     good coffee! After we 'ave 'ad it you shall go away if so is your wish, but my 'usband will
     certainly accompany you—"
"Most certainly I will do so; you will not move—no, not a single step—without me," said
     Monsieur Wachner solemnly.
And then Madame Wachner burst out into a sudden peal of laughter—laughter which was
     infectious.
Sylvia smiled too, and sat down again. After all, as Paul de Virieu had truly said, not once,
     but many times, the Wachners were not refined people—but they were kind and very good-natured.
     And then she, Sylvia, was tired and low-spirited to-night—no doubt she had imagined the change
     in their manner, which had so surprised and hurt her.
Madame Wachner was quite her old self again; just now she was engaged in heaping all the
     cherries which were in the dessert dish on her guest's plate, in spite of Sylvia's eager
     protest.
L'Ami Fritz got up and left the room. He was going into the kitchen to make the coffee.
"Mr. Chester was telling me of your valuable pearls," said Madame Wachner pleasantly. "I
      was surprised! What a lot of money to 'ang round one's neck! But it is worth it if
     one 'as so lovely a neck as 'as the beautiful Sylvia! May I look at your pearls, dear friend?
     Or do you never take them off?"
Sylvia unclasped the string of pearls and laid it on the table.
"Yes, they are rather nice," she said modestly. "I always wear them, even at night. Many
     people have a knot made between each pearl, for that, of course, makes the danger of losing
     them much less should the string break. But mine are not knotted, for a lady once told me that
     it made the pearls hang much less prettily; she said it would be quite safe if I had them
     restrung every six months. So that is what I do. I had them restrung just before coming to
     France."
Madame Wachner reverentially took up the pearls in her large hand; she seemed to be weighing
     them.
"How heavy they are," she said at length, and now she spoke French.
"Yes," said Sylvia, "you can always tell a real pearl by its weight."
"And to think," went on her hostess musingly, "that each of these tiny balls is worth—how
     much is it worth?—at least five or six hundred francs, I suppose?"
"Yes," said Sylvia again, "I'm glad to say they have increased in value during the last few
     years. You see, pearls are the only really fashionable gems just now."
"And they cannot be identified like other fine jewels," observed Madame Wachner, "but I
     suppose they are worth more together than separately?" she was still speaking in that
     thoughtful, considering tone.
"Oh, I don't know that," said Sylvia, smiling. "Each separate pearl is worth a good deal, but
     still I daresay you are right, for these are beautifully matched. I got them, by a piece of
     great luck, without having to pay—well, what I suppose one would call the middle-man's profit!
     I just paid what I should have done at a good London sale."
"And you paid?—seven—eight 'undred pounds?" asked Madame Wachner, this time in English, and
     fixing her small, dark eyes on the fair Englishwoman's face.
"Oh, rather more than that." Sylvia grew a little red. "But as I said just now, they are
     always increasing in value. Even Mr. Chester, who did not approve of my getting these pearls,
     admits that I made a good bargain."
Through the open door she thought she heard Monsieur Wachner coming back down the passage. So
     she suddenly took the pearls out of the other woman's hand and clasped the string about her
     neck again.
L'Ami Fritz came into the room. He was holding rather awkwardly a little tray on which were
     two cups—one a small cup, the other a large cup, both filled to the brim with black coffee. He
     put the small cup before his guest, the large cup before his wife.
"I hope you do not mind having a small cup," he said solemnly. "I remember that you do not
     care to take a great deal of coffee, so I have given you the small cup."
Sylvia looked up.
"Oh dear!" she exclaimed, "I ought to have told you before you made it, Monsieur Wachner—but
     I won't have any coffee to-night. The last time I took some I lay awake all night."
"Oh, but you must take coffee!" Madame Wachner spoke good-humouredly, but with great
     determination. "The small amount you have in that little cup will not hurt you; and besides it
     is a special coffee, L'Ami Fritz's own mixture"—she laughed heartily.
And again? Sylvia noticed that Monsieur Wachner looked at his wife with a fixed, rather angry
     look, as much as to say, "Why are you always laughing? Why cannot you be serious
     sometimes?"
"But to-night, honestly, I would really rather not have any coffee!"
Sylvia had suddenly seen a vision of herself lying wide awake during long dark hours—hours
     which, as she knew by experience, generally bring to the sleepless, worrying thoughts.
"No, no, I will not have any coffee to-night," she repeated.
"Yes, yes, dear friend, you really must," Madame Wachner spoke very persuasively. "I should
     be truly sorry if you did not take this coffee. Indeed, it would make me think you were angry
     with us because of the very bad supper we had given you! L'Ami Fritz would not have taken the
     trouble to make coffee for his old wife. He has made it for you, only for you; he will be hurt
     if you do not take it!"
The coffee did look very tempting and fragrant.
Sylvia had always disliked coffee in England, but somehow French coffee was quite different;
     it had quite another taste from that of the mixture which the ladies of Market Dalling pressed
     on their guests at their dinner-parties.
She lifted the pretty little cup to her lips—but the coffee, this coffee of L'Ami Fritz, his
     special mixture, as his wife had termed it, had a rather curious taste, it was slightly
     bitter—decidedly not so nice as that which she was accustomed to drink each day after déjeuner
     at the Villa du Lac. Surely it would be very foolish to risk a bad night for a small cup of
     indifferent coffee?
She put the cup down, and pushed it away.
"Please do not ask me to take it," she said firmly. "It really is very bad for me!"
Madame Wachner shrugged her shoulders with an angry gesture.
"So be it," she said, and then imperiously, "Fritz, will you please come with me for a moment
     into the next room? I have something to ask you."
He got up and silently obeyed his wife. Before leaving the room he slipped the key of the
     garden gate into his trousers pocket.
A moment later Sylvia, left alone, could hear them talking eagerly to one another in that
     strange, unknown tongue in which they sometimes—not often—addressed one another.
She got up from her chair, seized with a sudden, eager desire to slip away before they came
     back. For a moment she even thought of leaving the house without waiting for her hat and little
     fancy bag; and then, with a strange sinking of the heart she remembered that the white gate was
     locked, and that L'Ami Fritz had now the key of it in his pocket.
But in no case would Sylvia have had time to do what she had thought of doing, for a moment
     later her host and hostess were back in the room.
Madame Wachner sat down again at the dining-table,
"One moment!" she exclaimed, rather breathlessly. "Just wait till I 'ave finished my coffee,
     Sylvia dear, and then L'Ami Fritz will escort you 'ome."
Rather unwillingly, Sylvia again sat down.
Monsieur Wachner was paying no attention either to his guest or to his wife. He took up the
     chair on which he had been sitting, and placed it out of the way near the door. Then he lifted
     the lighted lamp off the table and put it on the buffet.
As he did so, Sylvia, looking up, saw the shadow of his tall, lank figure thrown grotesquely,
     hugely, against the opposite wall of the room.
"Now take the cloth off the table," he said curtly. And his wife, gulping down the last drops
     of her coffee, got up and obeyed him.
Sylvia suddenly realised that they were getting ready for something—that they wanted the room
     cleared.
As with quick, deft fingers she folded up the cloth, Madame Wachner exclaimed, "As you are
     not taking any coffee, Sylvia, perhaps it is time for you now to get up and go away."
Sylvia Bailey looked across at the speaker, and reddened deeply. She felt very angry. Never
     in the course of her pleasant, easy, prosperous life had anyone ventured to dismiss her in this
     fashion from their house.
She rose, for the second time during the course of her short meal, to her feet—
And then, in a flash, there occurred that which transformed her anger into agonised fear—fear
     and terror.
The back of her neck had been grazed by something sharp and cold, and as she gave a smothered
     cry she saw that her string of pearls had parted in two. The pearls were now falling quickly
     one by one, and rolling all over the floor.
Instinctively she bent down, but as she did so she heard the man behind her make a quick
     movement.
She straightened herself and looked sharply round.
L'Ami Fritz was still holding in his hand the small pair of nail scissors with which he had
     snipped asunder her necklace; with the other he was in the act of taking out something from the
     drawer of the buffet.
She suddenly saw what that something was.
Sylvia Bailey's nerves steadied; her mind became curiously collected and clear. There had
     leapt on her the knowledge that this man and woman meant to kill her—to kill her for the sake
     of the pearls which were still bounding about the floor, and for the comparatively small sum of
     money which she carried slung in the leather bag below her waist.
L'Ami Fritz now stood staring at her. He had put his right hand—the hand holding the thing he
     had taken out of the drawer—behind his back. He was very pale; the sweat had broken out on his
     sallow, thin face.
For a horrible moment there floated across Sylvia's sub-conscious mind the thought of Anna
     Wolsky, and of what she now knew to have been Anna Wolsky's fate.
But she put that thought, that awful knowledge, determinedly away from her. The instinct of
     self-preservation possessed her wholly.
Already, in far less time than it would have taken to formulate the words, she had made up
     her mind to speak, and she knew exactly what she meant to say.
"It does not matter about my pearls," Sylvia said, quietly. Her voice shook a little, but
     otherwise she spoke in her usual tone. "If you are going into Paris to-morrow morning, perhaps
     you would take them to be restrung?"
The man looked questioningly across at his wife.
"Yes, that sounds a good plan," he said, in his guttural voice.
"No," exclaimed Madame Wachner, decidedly, "that will not do at all! We must not run that
     risk. The pearls must be found, now, at once! Stoop!" she said imperiously. "Stoop, Sylvia!
     Help me to find your pearls!"
She made a gesture as if she also meant to bend down....
But Sylvia Bailey made no attempt to obey the sinister order. Slowly, warily she edged
     herself towards the closed window. At last she stood with her back to it—at bay.
"No," she said quietly, "I will not stoop to pick up my pearls now, Madame Wachner. It will
     be easier to find them in the daylight. I am sure that Monsieur Wachner could pick them all up
     for me to-morrow morning. Is not that so, Ami Fritz?" and there was a tone of pleading, for the
     first time of pitiful fear, in her soft voice.
She looked at him piteously, her large blue eyes wide open, dilated—
"It is not my husband's business to pick up your pearls!" exclaimed Madame Wachner
     harshly.
She stepped forward and gripped Sylvia by the arm, pulling her violently forward. As she did
     so she made a sign to her husband, and he pushed a chair quickly between Mrs. Bailey and the
     window.
Sylvia had lost her point of vantage, but she was young and lithe; she kept her feet.
Nevertheless, she knew with a cold, reasoned knowledge that she was very near to death—that
     it was only a question of minutes,—unless—unless she could make the man and woman before her
     understand that they would gain far more money by allowing her to live than by killing her now,
     to-night, for the value of the pearls that lay scattered on the floor, and the small, the
     pitiably small sum on her person.
"If you will let me go," she said, desperately, "I swear I will give you everything I have in
     the world!"
Madame Wachner suddenly laid her hand on Sylvia's arm, and tried to force her down on to her
     knees.
"What do you take us for?" she cried, furiously. "We want nothing from you—nothing at
     all!"
She looked across at her husband, and there burst from her lips a torrent of words, uttered
     in the uncouth tongue which the Wachners used for secrecy.
Sylvia tried desperately to understand, but she could make nothing of the strange,
     rapid-spoken syllables—until there fell on her ear, twice repeated, the name
     Wolsky....
Madame Wachner stepped suddenly back, and as she did so L'Ami Fritz moved a step forward.
Sylvia looked at him, an agonised appeal in her eyes. He was smiling hideously, a nervous
     grin zig-zagging across his large, thin-lipped mouth.
"You should have taken the coffee," he muttered in English. "It would have saved us all so
     much trouble!"
He put out his left hand, and the long, strong fingers closed, tentacle-wise, on her slender
     shoulder.
His right hand he kept still hidden behind his back—
The great open-air restaurant in the Champs Élysées was full of foreigners, and Paul de
     Virieu and Bill Chester were sitting opposite to one another on the broad terrace dotted with
     little tables embowered in flowering shrubs.
They were both smoking,—the Englishman a cigar, the Frenchman a cigarette. It was now
     half-past seven, and instead of taking the first express to Switzerland they had decided to
     have dinner comfortably in Paris and to go on by a later train.
Neither man felt that he had very much to say to the other, and Chester started a little in
     his seat when Paul de Virieu suddenly took his cigarette out of his mouth, put it down on the
     table, and leant forward. He looked at the man sitting opposite to him straight in the
     eyes.
"I do not feel at all happy at our having left Mrs. Bailey alone at Lacville," he said,
     deliberately.
Chester stared back at him, telling himself angrily as he did so that he did not in the least
     know what the Frenchman was driving at!
What did Paul de Virieu mean by saying this stupid, obvious thing, and why should he drag in
     the question of his being happy or unhappy?
"You know that I did my best to persuade her to leave the place," said Chester shortly. Then,
     very deliberately he added, "I am afraid, Count, that you've got quite a wrong notion in your
     mind concerning myself and Mrs. Bailey. It is true I am her trustee, but I have no power of
     making her do what I think sensible, or even what I think right. She is absolutely her own
     mistress."
He stopped abruptly, for he had no wish to discuss Sylvia and Sylvia's affairs with this
     foreigner, however oddly intimate Mrs. Bailey had allowed herself to get with the Comte de
     Virieu.
"Lacville is such a very queer place," observed the Count, meditatively. "It is perhaps even
     queerer than you know or guess it to be, Mr. Chester."
The English lawyer thought the remark too obvious to answer. Of course Lacville was a queer
     place—to put it plainly, little better than a gambling hell. He knew that well enough! But it
     was rather strange to hear the Comte de Virieu saying so—a real case, if ever there was one, of
     Satan rebuking sin.
So at last he answered, irritably, "Of course it is! I can't think what made Mrs. Bailey go
     there in the first instance." His mind was full of Sylvia. He seemed to go on speaking of her
     against his will.
"Her going to Lacville was a mere accident," explained Paul de Virieu, quickly. "She was
     brought there by the Polish lady, Madame Wolsky, of whom you must have heard her speak, whom
     she met in an hotel in Paris, and who disappeared so mysteriously. It is not a place for a
     young lady to be at by herself."
Bill Chester tilted back the chair on which he was sitting. Once more he asked himself what
     on earth the fellow was driving at? Were these remarks a preliminary to the Count's saying that
     he was not going to Switzerland after all—that he was going back to Lacville in order to take
     care of Sylvia.
Quite suddenly the young Englishman felt shaken by a very primitive and, till these last few
     days, a very unfamiliar feeling—that of jealousy.
Damn it—he wouldn't have that. Of course he was no longer in love with Sylvia Bailey, but he
     was her trustee and lifelong friend. It was his duty to prevent her making a fool of herself,
     either by gambling away her money—the good money the late George Bailey had toiled so hard to
     acquire—or, what would be ever so much worse, by making some wretched marriage to a foreign
     adventurer.
He stared suspiciously at his companion. Was it likely that a real count—the French
     equivalent to an English earl—would lead the sort of life this man, Paul de Virieu, was
     leading, and in a place like Lacville?
"If you really feel like that, I think I'd better give up my trip to Switzerland, and go back
     to Lacville to-morrow morning."
He stared hard at the Count, and noted with sarcastic amusement the other's appearance—so
     foppish, so effeminate to English eyes; particularly did he gaze with scorn at the Count's
     yellow silk socks, which matched his lemon-coloured tie and silk pocket handkerchief. Fancy
     starting for a long night journey in such a "get-up." Well! Perhaps women liked that sort of
     thing, but he would never have thought Sylvia Bailey to be that sort of woman.
A change came over Paul de Virieu's face. There was unmistakable relief—nay, more—even joy in
     the voice with which the Frenchman answered,
"That is excellent! That is quite right! That is first-rate! Yes, yes, Mr. Chester, you go
     back to Lacville and bring her away. It is not right that Mrs. Bailey should be by herself
     there. It may seem absurd to you, but, believe me, Lacville is not a safe spot in which to
     leave an unprotected woman. She has not one single friend, not a person to whom she could turn
     to for advice,—excepting, of course, the excellent Polperro himself, and he naturally desires
     to keep his profitable client."
"There's that funny old couple—I mean the man called Fritz Something-or-other and his wife.
     Surely they're all right?" observed Chester.
Paul de Virieu shook his head decidedly.
"The Wachners are not nice people," he said slowly. "They appear to be very fond of Mrs.
     Bailey, I know, but they are only fond of themselves. They are adventurers; 'out for the
     stuff,' as Americans say. Old Fritz is the worst type of gambler—the type that believes he is
     going to get rich, rich beyond dreams of avarice, by a 'system.' Such a man will do anything
     for money. I believe they knew far more of the disappearance of Madame Wolsky than anyone else
     did."
The Count lowered his voice, and leant over the table.
"I have suspected," he went on—"nay, I have felt sure from the very first, Mr. Chester, that
     the Wachners are blackmailers. I am convinced that they discovered something to that
     poor lady's discredit, and—after making her pay—drove her away! Just before she left Lacville
     they were trying to raise money at the Casino money-changer's on some worthless shares. But
     after Madame Wolsky's disappearance they had plenty of gold and notes."
Chester looked across at his companion. At last he was really impressed. Blackmailing is a
     word which has a very ugly sound in an English lawyer's ears.
"If that is really true," he said suddenly, "I almost feel as if I ought to go back to
     Lacville to-night. I suppose there are heaps of trains?"
"You might, at all events, wait till to-morrow morning," said Paul de Virieu, drily.
He also had suddenly experienced a thrill of that primitive passion, jealousy, which had
     surprised Chester but a few moments before. But the Count was a Frenchman. He was familiar with
     the sensation—nay, he welcomed it. It showed that he was still young—still worthy to be one of
     the great company of lovers.
Sylvia, his "petite amie Anglaise," seemed to have come very near to him in the last few
     moments. He saw her blue eyes brim with tears at his harsh words—he thrilled as he had thrilled
     with the overmastering impulse which had made him take her into his arms—her hand lay once more
     in his hand, as it had lain, for a moment this morning.
Had he grasped and retained that kind, firm little hand in his, an entirely new life had been
     within his reach.
A vision rose before Paul de Virieu—a vision of Sylvia and himself living heart to heart in
     one of those small, stately manor-houses which are scattered throughout Brittany. And it was no
     vague house of dreams. He knew the little château very well. Had not his sister driven him
     there only the other day? And had she not conveyed to him in delicate, generous words how
     gladly she would see his sweet English friend established there as châtelaine?
A sense of immeasurable loss came over Paul de Virieu—But, no, he had been right! Quite
     right! He loved Sylvia far too well to risk making her as unhappy as he would almost certainly
     be tempted to make her, if she became his wife.
He took off his hat and remained silent for what seemed to his companion quite a long
     time.
"By the way, what is Mrs. Bailey doing to-night?" he asked at last.
"To-night?" replied Chester. "Let me see? Why, to-night she is spending the evening with
     those very people—the Wachners, of whom you were speaking just now. I heard her arranging it
     with them this afternoon." He added, stiffly, "But I doubt if your impression as to these
     people is a right one. They seem to me a very respectable couple."
Paul de Virieu shrugged his shoulders. He felt suddenly uneasy—afraid he hardly knew of
     what.
There was no risk that Sylvia Bailey would fall a victim to blackmailers—she had nothing to
     be ashamed of, nothing to conceal. But still he hated to think that she was, even now, alone
     with a man and woman of whom he had formed such a bad impression.
He took his watch out of his pocket. "There's a train for Lacville at a quarter to ten," he
     said slowly. "That would be an excellent train for—for us—to take—"
"Then are you thinking of going back to Lacville too?" There was that sarcastic inflection in
     the Englishman's voice which the Count had learned to look for and to resent.
"Yes."
Count Paul looked at Bill Chester significantly, and his look said, "Take care, my friend! We
     do not allow a man to sneer at another man in this country unless he is willing to stand
     certain unpleasant consequences. Our duels are not always pour rire!"
During the short train journey back to Lacville they hardly spoke. Each thought that the
     other was doing a strange and unreasonable thing—a thing which the thinker could have done much
     better if left to himself.
At Lacville station they jumped into a victoria.
"I suppose we had better drive straight to the Villa du Lac," said Chester, hesitatingly.
"Yes, we had better go first to the Villa du Lac, for Mrs. Bailey should be home by now. By
     the way, Mr. Chester, you had better ask to have my room to-night; we know that it is
     disengaged. As for me, I will go on somewhere else as soon as I know you have seen our friend.
     Please do not tell Mrs. Bailey that I came with you. Where would be the use? I may go back to
     Paris to-night." Paul de Virieu spoke in a constrained, preoccupied voice.
"But aren't you coming in? Won't you stay at Lacville at least till to-morrow?"
Chester's voice unwittingly became far more cordial; if the Frenchman did not wish to see
     Sylvia, why had he insisted on coming back, too, to Lacville.
The hall of the Villa du Lac was brightly lit up, and as the victoria swept up the short
     drive to the stone horseshoe stairway, the Comte de Virieu suddenly grasped the other's
     hand.
"Good luck!" he exclaimed, "Good luck, fortunate man! As the Abbot at my English school used
     to say to me when he met me, as a little boy, running about the cloisters, 'God bless
     you!'"
Chester was rather touched, as well as surprised. But what queer, emotional fellows Frenchmen
     are to be sure! Although Count Paul, as Sylvia used to call him, had evidently been a little
     bit in love with her himself, he was quite willing to think of her as married to another
     man!
But—but there was the rub! Chester was no longer so sure that he wanted to marry Sylvia. She
     had become a different woman—she seemed to be another Sylvia to the one he had always
     known.
"I'll just come out and tell you that it's all right," he said a little awkwardly. "But I
     wish you'd come in—if only for a minute. Mrs. Bailey would be so pleased to see you."
"No, no," muttered the other. "Believe me, she would not!"
Chester jumped out of the carriage and ran quickly up the stone steps, and rang the bell.
The door was opened by M. Polperro himself. Even busier than usual was the merry, capable
     little chef, for as it happened Madame Polperro had had to go away for two or three days.
"I want to know," said Chester abruptly, "if you can let me have a room for to-night? The
     room the Comte de Virieu occupied is, I suppose, disengaged?"
"I will see, M'sieur—I will inquire!"
M. Polperro did not know what to make of this big Englishman who had come in out of the
     night, bringing no luggage with him but one little bag.
Then he suddenly remembered! Why, of course, this was the friend of the pretty, charming,
     wealthy Madame Bailey; the English gentleman who had been staying during the past few days at
     the Pension Malfait! A gentleman who was called after a well-known cheese—yes, Chester was his
     name.
Then this Mr. Chester's departure from Lacville had been a fausse sortie—a
      ruse to get rid of the Comte de Virieu, who was also in love with the lovely young
     English widow?
Ah! Ah! M. Polperro felt very much amused. Never had he heard of anything so droll! But the
     Englishman's tale of love was not to run smooth after all, for now another complication had
     arisen, and the very last one any sensible man would have expected!
"Yes, M'sieur," said M. Polperro demurely, "it is all right! I had forgotten! As you say, the
     Comte de Virieu's room is now empty, but"—he hesitated, and with a sly look added, "indeed we
     have another room empty to-night—a far finer room, with a view over the lake—the room Madame
     Bailey occupied."
"The room Mrs. Bailey occupied?" echoed Chester. "Has Mrs. Bailey changed her room
     to-day?"
"Oh, no, M'sieur! She left Lacville this very evening. I have but just now received a letter
     from her."
The little man could hardly keep serious. Oh! those Englishmen, who are said to be so cold!
     When in love they behave just like other people.
For Chester was staring at him with puzzled, wrathful eyes.
"Ah! what a charming lady, M'sieur; Madame Polperro and I shall miss her greatly. We hoped to
     keep Madame Bailey all the summer. But perhaps she will come back—now that M'sieur has
     returned." He really could not resist that last thrust.
"Left Lacville!" repeated Chester incredulously. "But that's impossible! It isn't more than
     three hours since we said good-bye to her at the station. She had no intention of leaving
     Lacville then. Do you say you've received a letter from her?"
"Yes, M'sieur."
"Will you please show it me?"
"Certainly, M'sieur."
M. Polperro, followed closely by the Englishman, trotted off into his office, a funny little
     hole of a place which had been contrived under the staircase. It was here that Madame Polperro
     was supposed to spend her busy days.
M. Polperro felt quite lost without his wife. Slowly, methodically, he began to turn over the
     papers on the writing-table, which, with one chair, filled up all the place.
There had evidently been a lovers' quarrel between these two peculiar English people. What a
     pity that the gentleman, who had very properly returned to beg the lady's pardon, had found his
     little bird flown—in such poetic terms did the landlord in his own mind refer to Sylvia
     Bailey.
The pretty Englishwoman's presence in the Villa du Lac had delighted M. Polperro's southern,
     sentimental mind; he felt her to be so decorative, as well as so lucrative, a guest for his
     beloved hotel. Mrs. Bailey had never questioned any of the extras Madame Polperro put in her
     weekly bills, and she had never become haggard and cross as other ladies did who lost money at
     the Casino.
As he turned over the papers—bills, catalogues, and letters with which the table was covered,
     these thoughts flitted regretfully through M. Polperro's mind.
But he had an optimistic nature, and though he was very sorry Madame Bailey had left the
     Villa du Lac so abruptly, he was gratified by the fact that she had lived up to the ideal he
     had formed of his English guest. Though Madame Bailey had paid her weekly bill only two days
     before—she was en pension by the day—she had actually sent him a hundred francs to pay for the
     two days' board; the balance to be distributed among the servants....
There could surely be no harm in giving this big Englishman the lady's letter? Still, M.
     Polperro was sorry that he had not Madame Polperro at his elbow to make the decision for
     him.
"Here it is," he said at last, taking a piece of paper out of the drawer. "I must have put it
     there for my wife to read on her return. It is a very gratifying letter—M'sieur will see that
     for himself!"
Chester took the folded-up piece of notepaper out of the little Frenchman's hand with a
     strange feeling of misgiving.
He came out into the hall and stood under the cut-glass chandelier—
"You have made a mistake," he exclaimed quickly; "this is not Mrs. Bailey's handwriting!"
"Oh, yes, M'sieur, it is certainly Mrs. Bailey's letter. You see there is the lady's
     signature written as plainly as possible!"
Chester looked down to where the man's fat finger pointed.
In the strange, the alien handwriting, were written two words which for a moment conveyed
     nothing to Chester, "Silvea" and "Baylee"; as for the writing, stiff, angular, large, it
     resembled Sylvia's sloping English caligraphy as little as did the two words purporting to be
     her signature resemble the right spelling of her name.
A thrill of fear, of terrifying suspicion, flooded Bill Chester's shrewd but commonplace
     mind.
Slowly he read the strange letter through:
"Monsieur Polperro (so ran the missive in French)—
"I am leaving Lacville this evening in order to join my friend Madame Wolsky. I request you
      therefore to send on my luggage to the cloak room at the Gare du Nord. I enclose a
      hundred-franc note to pay you what I owe. Please distribute the rest of the money among the
      servants. I beg to inform you that I have been exceedingly comfortable at the Villa du Lac,
      and I will recommend your hotel to all my friends.
"Yours very cordially,
"Sylvea Baylee."
Turning on his heel, and without even throwing a word of apology to the astonished, and by
     now indignant, M. Polperro, Chester rushed out of the hall and down the stone steps, below
     which stood the victoria.
"Well?" cried out Paul de Virieu.
"Come into the house—now, at once!" cried Chester, roughly. "Something extraordinary has
     happened!"—
The Count jumped out of the carriage, and a moment later the two men stood together in the
     hall, careless of the fact that M. Polperro was staring at them with affrighted eyes.
"This letter purports to be from Sylvia Bailey," exclaimed Chester hoarsely, "but of course
     it is nothing of the sort! She never wrote a line of it. It's entirely unlike her
     handwriting—and then look at the absurd signature! What does it mean, Virieu? Can you give me
     any clue to what it means?"
The Comte de Virieu raised his head from over the thin sheet of notepaper, and even Chester,
     frightened and angry as he now was, could not help noticing how the other man's face had
     changed in the last few moments. From being of a usual healthy sunburn, it had turned so white
     as to look almost green under the bright electric light.
"Yes, I think I know what it means," said Count Paul between his teeth. "A letter like this
     purported to come from Madame Wolsky when she disappeared. But do not let us make a scene here.
     Let us go at once where I believe she is, for if what I fear is true every moment is of
     value."
He plucked the Englishman by the sleeve, and hurried him out into the grateful darkness.
"Get into the carriage," he said, imperiously. "I will see to everything."
Chester heard him direct the driver to the police-station. "We may need two or three
     gendarmes," muttered Count Paul. "It's worth the three minutes delay."
The carriage drew up before a shabby little house across which was painted in large black
     letters the word "Gendarmerie."
The Count rushed into the guard-room, hurriedly explained his errand to the superintendent,
     and came out, but a moment later, with three men.
"We must make room for these good fellows somehow," he said briefly, and room was made.
     Chester noticed with surprise that each man was armed, not only with a stave, but with a
     revolver. The French police do not stand on ceremony even with potential criminals.
"And now," said the Count to the coachman, "five louis, my friend, if you can get us to the
     Châlet des Muguets in seven minutes—"
They began driving at a breakneck pace, the driver whipping up his horse, lashing it in a way
     that horrified Chester. The light little carriage rocked from side to side.
"If the man doesn't drive more carefully," cried out the Englishman, "we shall be spilt—and
     that won't do us any good, will it?"
The Count called out, "If there's an accident you get nothing, my friend! Drive as quickly as
     you like, but drive carefully."
They swept on through the town, and so along the dimly-lighted shady avenues with which even
     Chester had become so familiar during the last few days.
Paul de Virieu sat with clenched hands, staring in front of him. Remorse filled his
     soul—remorse and anguish. If Sylvia had been done to death, as he now had very little doubt
     Anna Wolsky had been done to death, then he would die too. What was the vice which had meant
     all to him for so many years compared to his love for Sylvia?
The gendarmes murmured together in quick, excited tones. They scented that something really
     exciting, something that would perhaps lead to promotion, was going to happen.
At last, as the carriage turned into a dark road, Count Paul suddenly began to talk, at the
     very top of his voice.
"Speak, Mr. Chester, speak as loud as you can! Shout! Say anything that you like! They may as
     well hear that we are coming—"
But Chester could not do what the other man so urgently asked him to do. Not to save his life
     could he have opened his mouth and shouted as the other was now doing.
"We are going to pay an evening call—what you in England call an evening call! We are going
     to fetch our friend—our friend, Mrs. Bailey; she is so charming, so delightful! We are going to
     fetch her because she has been spending the evening with her friends, the Wachners. That old
     she-devil—you remember her, surely? The woman who asked you concerning your plans? It is she I
     fear—"
"Je crois que c'est ici, Monsieur?" the man turned round on his seat. "I have done
     it in six minutes!"
The horse was suddenly brought up short opposite the white gate. Was this where the Wachners
     lived? Chester stooped down. The place looked very different now from what it had looked in the
     daylight.
The windows of the small, low house were closely shuttered, but where the shutters met in one
     of the rooms glinted a straight line of light.
"We are in time. Thank God we are in time," said the Count, with a queer break in his voice.
     "If we were not in time, there would be no light. The house of the wicked ones would be in
     darkness."
And then, in French, he added, turning to the gendarmes:
"You had better all three stay in the garden, while my friend and I go up to the house. If we
     are gone more than five minutes, then you follow us up to the house and get in somehow!"
In varying accents were returned the composed answers, "Oui, M'sieur."
There came a check, for the little gate was locked. Each man helped another over very
     quietly, and then the three gendarmes dispersed with swift, noiseless steps, each seeking a
     point of vantage commanding the house.
Chester and Paul de Virieu walked quickly up the path.
Suddenly a shaft of bright light pierced the moonlit darkness. The shutters of the
     dining-room of the Châlet des Muguets had been unbarred, and the window was thrown wide
     open.
"Qui va là?" the old military watchword, as the Frenchman remembered with a sense of
     terrible irony, was flung out into the night in the harsh, determined voice of Madame
     Wachner.
They saw her stout figure, filling up most of the window, outlined against the lighted room.
     She was leaning out, peering into the garden with angry, fear-filled eyes.
Both men stopped simultaneously, but neither answered her.
"Who goes there?" she repeated; and then, "I fear, Messieurs, that you have made a mistake.
     You have taken this villa for someone else's house!" But there was alarm as well as anger in
     her voice.
"It is I, Paul de Virieu, Madame Wachner."
The Count spoke quite courteously, his agreeable voice thickened, made hoarse by the strain
     to which he had just subjected it.
"I have brought Mr. Chester with me, for we have come to fetch Mrs. Bailey. In Paris Mr.
     Chester found news making her return home to England to-morrow a matter of imperative
     necessity."
He waited a moment, then added, raising his voice as he spoke: "We have proof that she is
     spending the evening with you," and he walked on quickly to where he supposed the front door to
     be.
"If they deny she is there," he whispered to his companion, "we will shout for the gendarmes
     and break in. But I doubt if they will dare to deny she is there unless—unless—"
He had hoped to hear Sylvia's voice, but Madame Wachner had shut the window, and a deathly
     silence reigned in the villa.
The two men stood in front of the closed door for what seemed to them a very long time. It
     was exactly two minutes; and when at last the door opened, slowly, and revealed the tall, lanky
     figure of L'Ami Fritz, they both heard the soft, shuffling tread of the gendarmes closing in
     round the house.
"I pray you to come in," said Monsieur Wachner in English, and then, addressing Bill
     Chester,
"I am pleased to see you, sir, the more so that your friend, Mrs. Bailey, is indisposed. A
     moment ago, to our deep concern, she found herself quite faint—no doubt from the heat. I will
     conduct you, gentlemen, into the drawing-room; my wife and Mrs. Bailey will join us there in a
     minute," and only then did he move back sufficiently to allow the two men to cross the
     threshold.
Paul de Virieu opened his lips—but no sound came from them. The sudden sense of relief from
     what had been agonised suspense gripped him by the throat.
He brushed past Wachner, and made straight for the door behind which he felt sure of finding
     the woman whom some instinct told him he had saved from a terrible fate....
He turned the handle of the dining-room door, and then stopped short, for he was amazed at
     the sight which met his eyes.
Sylvia was sitting at a round table; behind her was the buffet, still laden with the remains
     of a simple meal. Her face was hidden in her hands, and she was trembling—shaking as though she
     had the ague.
But what amazed Paul de Virieu was the sight of Sylvia's hostess. Madame Wachner was crawling
     about on her hands and knees on the floor, and she remained in the same odd position when the
     dining-room door opened.
At last she looked up, and seeing who stood there, staring down at her, she raised herself
     with some difficulty, looking to the Frenchman's sharpened consciousness, like some monstrous
     greedy beast, suddenly baulked of its prey.
"Such a misfortune!" she exclaimed in English. "Such a very great misfortune! The necklace of
     our friend 'as broken, and 'er beautiful pearls are rolling all over the floor! We 'ave been
     trying, Fritz and myself, to pick them up for 'er. Is not that so, Sylvia? Mrs. Bailey is so
     distressed! It 'as made 'er feel very faint, what English people call 'queer'. But I tell 'er
     we shall find them all—it is only a matter of a little time. I asked 'er to take some cognac my
     'usband keeps for such bad moments, but no, she would not! Is not that so, Sylvia?"
She stared down anxiously at the bowed head of her guest.
Sylvia looked up. As if hypnotised by the other woman's voice, she rose to her feet—a wan,
     pitiful little smile came over her white face.
"Yes," she said dully, "the string of my pearls broke. I was taken faint. I felt horribly
     queer—perhaps it was the heat."
Paul de Virieu took a sudden step forward into the room. He had just become aware of
     something which had made him also feel what English people call "queer."
That something had no business in the dining-room, for it belonged to the kitchen—in fact it
     was a large wooden mallet of the kind used by French cooks to beat meat tender. Just now the
     club end of the mallet was sticking out of the drawer of the walnut-wood buffet.
The drawer had evidently been pulled out askew, and had stuck—as is the way with drawers
     forming part of ill-made furniture.
Chester came to the door of the dining-room. M. Wachner had detained him for a moment in the
     hall, talking volubly, explaining how pleasant had been their little supper party till Mrs.
     Bailey had suddenly felt faint.
Chester looked anxiously at Sylvia. She was oddly pale, all the colour drained from her face,
     but she seemed on quite good terms with Madame Wachner! As for that stout, good-natured looking
     woman, she also was unlike her placid smiling self, for her face looked red and puffy. But
     still she nodded pleasantly to Chester.
It seemed to the lawyer inconceivable that this commonplace couple could have seriously meant
     to rob their guest. But there was that letter—that strange, sinister letter which purported to
     be from Sylvia! Who had written that letter, and with what object in view?
Chester began to feel as if he was living through a very disagreeable, bewildering nightmare.
     But no scintilla of the horrible truth reached his cautious, well-balanced brain. The worst he
     suspected, and that only because of the inexplicable letter, was that these people meant to
     extract money from their guest and frighten her into leaving Lacville the same night.
"Sylvia," he said rather shortly, "I suppose we ought to be going now. We have a carriage
     waiting at the gate, so we shall be able to drive you back to the Villa du Lac. But, of course,
     we must first pick up all your pearls. That won't take long!"
But Sylvia made no answer. She did not even look round at him. She was still staring straight
     before her, as if she saw something, which the others could not see, written on the distempered
     wall.
L'Ami Fritz entered the room quietly. He looked even stranger than usual, for while in one
     hand he held Mrs. Bailey's pretty black tulle hat and her little bag, in the other was clutched
     the handle of a broom.
"I did not think you would want to go back into my wife's bed-room," he said, deprecatingly;
     and Mrs. Bailey, at last turning her head round, actually smiled gratefully at him.
She was reminding herself that there had been a moment when he had been willing to let her
     escape. Only once—only when he had grinned at her so strangely and deplored her refusal of the
     drugged coffee, had she felt the sick, agonising fear of him that she had felt of Madame
     Wachner.
Laying the hat and bag on the table, L'Ami Fritz began sweeping the floor with long skilful
     movements.
"This is the best way to find the pearls," he muttered; and three of the four people present
     stood and looked on at what he was doing. As for the one most concerned, Sylvia had again begun
     to stare dully before her, as if what was going on did not interest her one whit.
At last Monsieur Wachner took a long spoon off the table; with its help he put all that he
     had swept up—pearls, dust, and fluff—into the little fancy bag.
"There," he said, with a sigh of relief, "I think they are all there."
But even as he spoke he knew well enough that some of the pearls—perhaps five or six—had
     found their way up his wife's capacious sleeve.
And then, quite suddenly, Madame Wachner uttered a hoarse exclamation of terror. One of the
     gendarmes had climbed up on to the window-sill, and was now half into the room. She waddled
     quickly across to the door, only to find another gendarme in the hall.
Sylvia's eyes glistened, and a sensation which had hitherto been quite unknown to her took
     possession of her, soul and body. She longed for revenge—revenge, not for herself so much as
     for her murdered friend. She clutched Paul by the arm. "They killed Anna Wolsky," she
     whispered. "She is lying buried in the wood, where they meant to put me if you had not come
     just—only just—in time!"
Paul de Virieu took Sylvia's hat off the dining-room table, and placed it in her hand,
     closing her fingers over the brim. With a mechanical gesture she raised her arms and put it on
     her head. Then he ceremoniously offered her his arm, and led her out of the dining-room into
     the hall.
While actually within the Châlet des Muguets Count Paul only once broke silence. That was
     when Madame Wachner, still talking volubly, held out her hand in farewell to the young
     Englishwoman.
"I forbid you to touch her!" the Count muttered between his teeth, and Sylvia, withdrawing
     her half-outstretched hand, meekly obeyed him.
Paul de Virieu beckoned to the oldest of the police officials present.
"You will remember the disappearance from Lacville of a Polish lady? I have reason to believe
     these people murdered her. When once I have placed Madame Bailey under medical care, I will
     return here. Meanwhile you, of course, know what to do."
"But M'sieur, ought I not to detain this English lady?"
"Certainly not. I make myself responsible for her. She is in no state to bear an
     interrogation. Lock up these people in separate rooms. I will send you reinforcements, and
     to-morrow morning dig up the little wood behind the house."
Behind them came the gruff and the shrill tones of L'Ami Fritz and his wife raised in
     indignant expostulation.
"Are you coming, Sylvia?" called out Chester impatiently.
He had gone on into the garden, unwilling to assume any responsibility as to the police.
     After all, there was no evidence, not what English law would recognise as evidence,
     against these people.
Out in the darkness, with the two men, one on either side of her, Sylvia walked slowly to the
     gate. Between them they got her over it and into the victoria.
Paul de Virieu pulled out the little back seat, but Chester, taking quick possession of it,
     motioned him to sit by Mrs. Bailey.
"To Paris, Hôtel du Louvre," the Count called out to the driver. "You can take as long as you
     like over the journey!"
Then he bent forward to Chester, "The air will do her good," he murmured.
By his side, huddled up in a corner of the carriage, Sylvia lay back inertly; but her eyes
     were wide open, and she was staring hungrily at the sky, at the stars. She had never thought to
     see the sky and the stars again.
They were now moving very slowly, almost at a foot's pace.
The driver was accustomed to people who suddenly decided to drive all the way back to Paris
     from Lacville after an evening's successful or, for the matter of that, unsuccessful play. He
     had been very much relieved to see his two gentlemen come back from the châlet and to leave the
     gendarmes behind. He had no wish to get mixed up in a fracas, no wish, that is, to
     have any embarrassments with the police.
They drove on and on, into the open country; through dimly-lit, leafy thoroughfares, through
     long stretches of market gardens, till they came on to the outskirts of the great city—and
     still Sylvia remained obstinately silent.
Paul de Virieu leant forward.
"Speak to her," he said in an urgent whisper. "Take her hand and try to rouse her, Mr.
     Chester. I feel very anxious about her condition."
Chester in the darkness felt himself flushing. With a diffident, awkward gesture he took
     Sylvia's hand in his—and then he uttered an exclamation of surprise and concern.
The hand he held was quite cold—cold and nerveless to the touch, as if all that constitutes
     life had gone out of it. "My dear girl!" he exclaimed. "I'm afraid those people frightened you
     badly? I suppose you began to suspect they meant to steal your pearls?"
But Sylvia still remained obstinately silent. She did not want to speak, she only wanted to
     live.
It was so strange to feel oneself alive—alive and whole at a time when one had thought to be
     dead, having been done to death after an awful, disfiguring struggle—for Sylvia had determined
     to struggle to the end with her murderers.
"My God!" muttered Paul de Virieu. "Do you not understand, Chester, what happened to-night?
     They meant to kill her!"
"To kill her?" repeated Chester incredulously.
Then there came over him a rush and glow of angry excitement. Good God! If that was the case
     they ought to have driven back at once to the Lacville police-station!
"Sylvia!" he exclaimed. "Rouse yourself, and tell us what took place! If what the Count says
     is true, something must be done, and at once!"
He turned to Paul de Virieu: "The police ought to take Mrs. Bailey's full statement of all
     that occurred without any loss of time!" All the lawyer in him spoke angrily, agitatedly.
Sylvia moved slightly. Paul de Virieu could feel her shuddering by his side.
"Oh, Bill, let me try to forget!" she moaned. And then, lifting up her voice, she wailed,
     "They killed Anna Wolsky—"
Her voice broke, and she began to sob convulsively. "I would not think of her—I forced myself
     not to think of her—but now I shall never, never think of anyone else any more!"
Paul de Virieu turned in the kindly darkness, and putting his arm round Sylvia's slender
     shoulders, he tenderly drew her to him.
A passion of pity, of protective tenderness, filled his heart, and suddenly lifted him to a
     higher region than that in which he had hitherto been content to dwell.
"You must not say that, ma chérie," he whispered, laying his cheek to hers as
     tenderly as he would have caressed a child, "it would be too cruel to the living, to those who
     love you—who adore you."
Then he raised his head, and, in a very different tone, he exclaimed,
"Do not be afraid, Mr. Chester, those infamous people shall not be allowed to escape! Poor
     Madame Wolsky shall surely be avenged. But Mrs. Bailey will not be asked to make any statement,
     except in writing—in what you in England call an affidavit. You do not realise, although you
     doubtless know, what our legal procedure is like. Not even in order to secure the guillotine
     for Madame Wachner and her Fritz would I expose Mrs. Bailey to the ordeal of our French
     witness-box."
"And how will it be possible to avoid it?" asked Chester, in a low voice.
Paul de Virieu hesitated, then, leaning forward and holding Sylvia still more closely and
     protectively to him, he said very deliberately the fateful words he had never thought to
     say,
"I have an announcement to make to you, Mr. Chester. It is one which I trust will bring me
     your true congratulations. Mrs. Bailey is about to do me the honour of becoming my wife."
He waited a moment, then added very gravely, "I am giving her an undertaking, a solemn
     promise by all I hold most sacred, to abandon play—"
Chester felt a shock of amazement. How utterly mistaken, how blind he had been! He had felt
     positively certain that Sylvia had refused Paul de Virieu; and he had been angered by the
     suspicion, nay, by what he had thought the sure knowledge, that the wise refusal had cost her
     pain.
But women are extraordinary creatures, and so, for the matter of that, are Frenchmen—
Still, his feelings to the man sitting opposite to him had undergone a complete change. He
     now liked—nay, he now respected—Paul de Virieu. But for the Count, whom he had thought to be
     nothing more than an effeminate dandy, a hopeless gambler, where would Sylvia be now? The
     unspoken answer to this question gave Chester a horrible inward tremor.
He leant forward, and grasped Paul de Virieu's left hand.
"I do congratulate you," he said, simply and heartily; "you deserve your great good fortune."
     Then, to Sylvia, he added quietly, "My dear, it is to him you owe your life."
